The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that economic activity is expanding at a moderate pace.
Total nonfarm payroll employment increased in July at a
rate close to its average advance in earlier months of
the year, and the civilian unemployment rate declined
to 6.8 percent. Industrial production turned up in
July after posting small declines in May and June.
Retail sales edged higher in July following a sizable
rise in the second quarter. Housing starts were down
somewhat in July, but permits moved up. Available
indicators point to continued expansion in business
capital spending. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade
deficit declined in May, but for April and May combined
it was larger than its average rate in the first
quarter. After rising at a faster rate in the early
part of the year, consumer prices have changed little
and producer prices have fallen in recent months.
Short-and intermediate-term interest rates have
changed little since the Committee meeting on [masked date] while yields on long-term Treasury and corporate bonds
have declined somewhat. In foreign exchange markets,
the trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the
other G-10 currencies was about unchanged on balance
over the intermeeting period.
After expanding appreciably over the second
quarter, M2 increased slightly further in July and M3
declined. For the year through July, M2 is estimated
to have grown at a rate close to the lower end of the
Committee's range for the year, and M3 at a rate
slightly below its range. Total domestic nonfinancial
debt has expanded at a moderate rate in recent months,
and for the year through June it is estimated to have
increased at a rate in the lower half of the
Committee's monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July lowered the ranges it had established
in February for growth of M2 and M3 to ranges of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of
[masked number of year] . The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases would
persist over the balance of the year and that money
growth within these lower ranges would be consistent
with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was
lowered to 4 to 8 percent for the year. For [masked number of year] the
Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the
fourth quarter of [masked number of year] of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and
0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committee provisionally set
the monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt at 4 to 8 percent for [masked number of year] . The behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with modest growth in M2 and little net change in M3
over the balance of the third quarter.
Votes for this action
: Messrs. Greenspan, McDonough, Angell, Boehne, Keehn, Kelley, LaWare, Lindsey, McTeer, Mullins, Ms. Phillips, and Mr. Stern.
Votes against this action:
None.