The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets since the December meeting.
There were no market transactions for System Account during this
period, and thus no vote was required of the Committee.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government securities and federal agency obligations during the period
[masked date] through [masked date] . By unanimous vote, the
Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested a strong
further rise in economic activity during the closing months of [masked number of year] .
Although consumer spending appeared to be less buoyant and housing
demand had softened somewhat, growth in business investment, exports,
and inventories remained brisk. Industrial production and payroll
employment continued to record substantial gains. Broad indexes of
prices for consumer goods and services had risen moderately on average
over recent months despite shrinking margins of unemployed resources
and further sizable increases in the prices of many materials.
Nonfarm payroll employment advanced considerably further in
December after a sharp rise in November. Substantial job gains were
recorded in December in service industries and in the retail trade
sector. Hiring in manufacturing was brisk for a third straight month,
with labor demand especially strong in motor vehicles, capital goods,
and electronic equipment. Construction payrolls slipped after a large
increase in November. The average workweek was unchanged in December,
but factory overtime edged back up, matching the highest level reached
in the history of this series. The civilian unemployment rate
declined to 5.4 percent.
Industrial production registered another large advance in
December. Manufacturing accounted for all of the gain; an upturn in
mining production offset a decline in the output of utilities
associated with unseasonably warm weather. In manufacturing, the
output of motor vehicles and parts surged again and further solid
gains were recorded in the production of other goods. The large
advance in industrial output in December boosted rates of capacity
utilization above already high levels.
Retail sales were reported to have changed little over
November and December after substantial advances in September and
October; the flattening of sales reflected sharply reduced increases
in outlays for non-auto consumer goods. Consumer spending on services
rose moderately on balance over November and December, with outlays
for energy services held down by unusually mild weather. Although
some indicators of housing demand had weakened, housing starts posted
sizable gains on balance over November and December; single-family
construction remained at a relatively high level despite the rise in
mortgage rates in [masked number of year] and multifamily construction continued its
gradual recovery from the depressed levels of early [masked number of year] . The
regional pattern of starts activity suggested that favorable weather
accounted for little of the strength in December.
Business fixed investment was estimated to have grown at a
very rapid pace in the fourth quarter, with a pickup indicated for
business spending on both equipment and nonresidential structures.
New orders for nondefense capital goods declined on balance over
November and December, but the large backlog of unfilled orders,
especially for computers, pointed to a continued strong expansion in
spending on business equipment in coming months. Nonresidential
construction activity was up considerably in November for a third
straight month, with increases in construction widespread by type of
structure. Recent data indicated that permits for nonresidential
construction were continuing to trend higher and perhaps were running
ahead of construction activity.
Business inventory investment remained brisk in November; in
the aggregate, the buildup was in line with shipments and sales. In
manufacturing, stocks increased more rapidly in November, but the
ratio of stocks to shipments declined further and was at a
historically low level. In wholesale trade, inventories rose less
rapidly in November, but the inventory-to-sales ratio increased
further, although it remained within its range of recent years.
Inventory accumulation slowed a little at the retail level, and the
inventory-to-sales ratio for this sector remained near the middle of
its range of recent years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened somewhat further in November, and for October and November
combined the deficit was well above its average rate in the third
quarter. The value of exports of goods and services increased more
slowly in the October-November period than in the third quarter,
largely reflecting reduced growth of exported industrial supplies.
The rise in the value of imports of goods and services for the
October-November period was led by increased imports of non-oil
industrial supplies and automotive, capital, and consumer goods.
Available data for the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] indicated continued
growth in economic activity, though perhaps at a somewhat slower pace,
in the major foreign industrial countries.
Consumer price inflation slowed a little in December despite
a jump in food prices that was only partly offset by a decline in
energy prices. Excluding food and energy items, consumer prices edged
up in December and rose significantly less in [masked number of year] than in [masked number of year] . At
the producer level, prices of finished goods also advanced more slowly
in December, with a drop in energy prices balancing a surge in food
prices. Prices of finished goods other than food and energy increased
modestly in [masked number of year] after being held down in [masked number of year] by a sharp drop in the
prices of tobacco products. In contrast to prices of finished goods,
price inflation at earlier stages of production picked up in [masked number of year] .
For intermediate goods other than food and energy items, prices rose
at a faster rate in the second half of [masked number of year] with the pickup most
clearly evident in materials used in manufacturing. Prices of crude
materials rose rapidly in the second half of [masked number of year] and for the year as
a whole. Increases in labor costs remained moderate. Average hourly
earnings were little changed on balance over November and December,
and for the year as a whole they advanced only slightly more than in
[masked number of year] . More broadly, hourly compensation of private industry workers
increased more slowly in the fourth quarter than in any of the
previous three quarters of [masked number of year] and the rise for the year was
significantly less than in [masked number of year] .
At its meeting on [masked date] the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that included a bias toward the possible
firming of reserve conditions during the intermeeting period.
Accordingly, the directive stated that in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, somewhat greater reserve
restraint would be acceptable or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable during the intermeeting period. The reserve
conditions associated with this directive were expected to be
consistent with modest growth in the broader monetary aggregates over
coming months.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were
directed toward maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. With the need for seasonal credit diminishing over the
period, adjustment plus seasonal borrowing trended lower but averaged
a little above anticipated levels. Near year-end, the Trading Desk
accommodated heavy demands for reserves through System RPs. The
federal funds rate averaged close to 5-1/2 percent during the
intermeeting period.
Most other market interest rates declined slightly on balance
over the period after the [masked date] meeting. Very short term
interest rates fell after the first of the year, reflecting the
disappearance of year-end premiums. More broadly, favorable news on
inflation and indications of some unexpected slowing in the growth of
final demands apparently led market participants to conclude that
further tightening of monetary policy, though still expected to be
substantial, would be less than previously thought and would be spread
over a longer period. Yields on tax-exempt instruments declined
considerably as concerns about the implications of Orange County's
problems for the financial condition of other municipal governments
abated. Strong earning reports for the fourth quarter boosted major
indexes of equity prices.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies declined somewhat over
the intermeeting period. The dollar fell substantially against the
mark, which was buoyed by safe-haven inflows from weaker European
currencies, but dropped less against the yen. One factor that weighed
against the dollar was uncertainty about the consequences for the U.S.
economy of the sharp depreciation of the Mexican peso and the related
economic and financial problems in Mexico and other developing
economies; market participants expressed some concern that the crisis
might constrain U.S. monetary policy in the event of further domestic
inflation pressures and that the counterpart to the large prospective
reduction in the Mexican current account deficit would lie importantly
in the already substantial U.S. deficit.
Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened in December, and data for
the first half of January suggested a further acceleration in that
month. Much of the pickup in M2 in December was due to rapid
expansion in overnight repurchase agreements and overnight
Eurodollars, which outweighed a further contraction of liquid accounts
associated in part with depositor efforts to obtain higher returns by
shifting funds into market instruments. The faster growth of M3
reflected, in addition to the acceleration of its M2 component, bank
use of large CDs and nondeposit sources of funds to finance relatively
robust demands for credit. From the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the
fourth quarter of [masked number of year] M2 grew at the lower end of the Committee's
range for [masked number of year] and M3 in the lower half of its range. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt had continued to expand at a moderate rate in recent
months, and for [masked number of year] it was in the lower half of its monitoring range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
growth of economic activity would slow substantially over the next
several quarters and for some period thereafter would average less
than the rate of increase in the economy's potential output. Consumer
spending was projected to be well sustained for a time but to be
restrained later by smaller gains in real incomes, the satisfaction of
pent-up demands, and the lagged effects of higher interest rates on
the demand for durable goods. Business outlays for new equipment were
expected to decelerate substantially in response to higher financing
costs and slower growth of sales and profits. Homebuilding was
anticipated to soften a little in response to slower growth in jobs
and income as well as to the increase that had occurred in mortgage
rates. Recent developments in Mexico were expected to cut into
exports in the near term, but the sustained economic growth elsewhere
would keep export demand on an uptrend. Although there was
considerable uncertainty regarding the fiscal outlook, in light of the
Congressional intent to cut the federal deficit the forecast
incorporated a somewhat greater degree of fiscal restraint than had
been built into recent forecasts. In the staff's judgment, the
economy currently was operating beyond its long-run, noninflationary
capacity, and there remained a substantial risk that inflation could
ratchet higher absent further monetary policy actions.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, the members agreed that growth in economic
activity could be expected to moderate considerably over the course of
[masked number of year] although inflation was likely to be higher than in [masked number of year] . They
acknowledged that their current projections were subject to
substantial risks. The expansion continued to display appreciable
momentum and signs of slower growth were still quite limited and
tentative. Even so, the members remained persuaded that the lagged
effects of the policy tightening implemented over the course of [masked number of year] would become increasingly evident in interest-sensitive sectors of the
economy as the year progressed. The projected moderation in the
growth of final demands, which probably would be concentrated at least
initially in the housing and consumer durables sectors, would
undoubtedly reinforce an expected cutback in inventory investment from
its unsustainable pace in recent quarters. A key uncertainty in the
outlook was whether the slowing in overall economic growth would be
sufficient to relieve the current pressures on labor and other
producer resources, which many members saw as portending higher
inflation, or, indeed, whether such pressures would intensify further.
Opinions differed to some degree with regard to both the likely extent
of the prospective slowing in economic growth and the outlook for
inflation. However, most of the members concluded that some rise in
inflation appeared probable over coming quarters, and they were
concerned that this upturn would not be reversed and could be extended
in the absence of further monetary restraint.
In keeping with the practice at meetings when the Committee
establishes its long-run ranges for growth of the money and debt
aggregates, the members of the Committee and the Federal Reserve Bank
presidents not currently serving as members had prepared individual
projections of economic activity, the rate of unemployment, and
inflation for the year [masked number of year] . Measured from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] their forecasts of the growth in real
GDP had a central tendency of 2 to 3 percent, compared with a growth
rate of 4 percent estimated for [masked number of year] . Most of the members also
anticipated that economic expansion in line with their forecasts would
be associated with little change in the unemployment rate and their
projections of the rate in the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] were centered in
a narrow range around 5-1/2 percent. The high levels of resource
utilization implied by these projections were viewed by most members
as likely to foster somewhat greater pressure on wages and prices.
Accordingly, projections of the rate of inflation, as indexed by the
consumer price index, had a central tendency of 3 to 3-1/2 percent for
the period from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of
[masked number of year] compared with rates of about 2-3/4 percent in both [masked number of year] and
[masked number of year] .
In their review of regional economic developments, members
referred to widespread evidence of further growth in business
activity, but a number also mentioned scattered signs of some
softening in a few areas or industries. Several emphasized, however,
that the anecdotal evidence did not currently point to any significant
moderation in the overall growth of the economy. With regard to
financial conditions, members commented that they saw little
indication that policy tightening actions over the past year were
constraining the availability of credit to any observable degree.
Despite higher interest rates, financial conditions remained broadly
supportive of further economic expansion. The performance of stock
market prices and the relatively narrow quality spreads in debt
markets attested to a considerable degree of confidence among
investors. Members also took note of the accommodative lending
policies of banking institutions. Those policies had encouraged rapid
growth in consumer and business loans and evidently were contributing
to the ongoing strength of the economic expansion. Some members
expressed concern that a number of banks might have eased their
lending standards unduly and thus assumed unwarranted risks in their
loan portfolios.
In their assessment of developments in key sectors of the
economy, members referred to the sluggish behavior of non-auto retail
sales in November and December, but they also noted that the available
information on consumer spending during the first few weeks of this
year was inconclusive with regard to the possible emergence of a
slowing trend. Anecdotal commentary on retail sales was mixed, and
evidence of some decline in January sales of motor vehicles needed to
be evaluated with caution because of the introduction of a new
reporting method. Consumer confidence was at a high level, but some
members observed that consumer indebtedness had grown rapidly and was
likely to exert a retarding effect on consumer spending at some point.
In this regard, however, it was pointed out that rising consumer
incomes had kept debt service burdens from increasing significantly
thus far. On balance, the members believed that the growth in
consumer spending probably would slow over the forecast horizon though
such spending might be relatively well maintained for some period,
given the ongoing expansion in jobs and incomes and the ready
availability of financing to many consumers. In any event, the
outlook for this sector of the economy, which was critical to any
significant moderation in overall economic growth, was uncertain with
regard to both the timing and the extent of possible slowing.
Housing construction was cited as potentially the most
important demand sector of the economy that was likely to contribute
to more moderate economic growth over the year ahead. As evidenced by
nationwide data through the end of [masked number of year] single-family housing starts
had held up unexpectedly well despite sizable increases in home
mortgage rates, but anecdotal reports from around the country had
pointed to weakening demand for new homes for several months and
continued to do so. Against the background of current mortgage rate
levels and the rise that had occurred in home mortgage indebtedness,
the members continued to anticipate softening demand for housing, at
least in the single-family sector. The mild uptrend in the much
smaller multifamily sector was likely to continue for some period,
given low rental vacancy rates in a number of areas, and further
improvement in nonresidential construction was likely to offset to
some extent the overall slowing in housing construction.
In the capital goods sector, real business-fixed investment
had strengthened further in the fourth quarter, and the members
believed, on the basis of rising order backlogs and the strength of
permits for new business construction, that considerable momentum had
carried into this year. While the growth in spending for business
equipment undoubtedly would moderate from its extraordinary pace over
an extended period, large business profits and the still relatively
low user cost of capital would tend to support appreciable further
growth in such investment in the context of elevated levels of
capacity utilization and ongoing efforts, induced by strong market
competition, to increase productivity. Moreover, nonresidential
construction was now trending higher, with particular strength evident
in industrial and commercial construction.
The pace of inventory accumulation in recent quarters was
viewed as unsustainable and a decline in inventory investment was seen
as likely over the forecast horizon, though the precise timing and
extent were impossible to predict. While slower growth in final
demand might in most circumstances stimulate a relatively sharp
adjustment in inventory investment, members cited factors that could
mute the size of that adjustment and its effects on overall GDP.
These included relatively low inventory/sales ratios across much of
the economy and little anecdotal or other evidence of unintended
inventory accumulation. Moreover, because an unusually large share of
the inventory buildup in recent quarters appeared to involve imports,
a cutback in such investment should tend to have a smaller-than-usual
impact on domestic production. There was no current evidence that
inventory investment was slowing, and indeed recent data on business
loans at banks might suggest some acceleration in inventory
accumulation since the beginning of the year. Nonetheless, as more
moderate growth in final demand began to emerge, concerns about the
availability of materials used in the production process or stocks
needed to meet market demand should diminish, and business firms could
be expected to trim their demand for inventories, perhaps aggressively
for a time. Indeed, this sector of the economy might well account for
much of the slowing in the expansion for some period of time during
the year ahead.
Fiscal policy was under active debate in the Congress, and
the members viewed the outcome of that debate as very uncertain. The
emergence of a moderately restrictive fiscal policy might be a
reasonable assumption to incorporate in current forecasts, albeit an
assumption that clearly was subject to a wide range of error. In any
event, any progress toward cutting future budget deficits was likely
to have a favorable effect on domestic financial markets and perhaps
also on the dollar in foreign exchange markets.
Developments in Mexico and their possible repercussions in
other developing nations had negative implications for U.S. exports,
at least over the short run. Indeed, some members cited anecdotal
evidence that reduced trade with Mexico had already emerged since late
[masked number of year] . Moreover, the effects of the earthquake in Kobe, Japan, seemed
to be disrupting trade with that nation in agricultural and other bulk
goods and was likely to continue doing so over the near term. Looking
beyond the months immediately ahead, the relatively robust growth
projected for many industrial countries together with the lower value
of the dollar should boost the nation's overall external trade
balance, though probably not to the extent of providing substantial
stimulus to the economy. One member observed that a number of
countries throughout the world faced the potential for important
changes in political conditions that could have adverse effects on
their growth and trading relationships, with possible repercussions on
U.S. exports.
Members commented that the strong growth in economic activity
and high levels of resource utilization had fostered relatively rapid
increases in the prices of many raw materials and semi-finished goods
used in the production process, but contrary to numerous forecasts
these developments had not led thus far to a broad pickup in inflation
as measured by the prices of final goods and services. This favorable
development might be explained in part by lags in the inflation
transmission process and perhaps to some degree by various structural
changes and productivity improvements in recent years that may have
raised both the level and the rate of increase of the economy's
potential for sustained activity. Many members observed, however,
that it would not be prudent from a monetary policy standpoint to
assume that continued rapid economic growth and further pressures on
producer resources would not lead to rising inflation over the
quarters ahead. While competitive pressures still generally limited
the extent to which business firms could pass through rising costs of
raw materials and other producer inputs to the prices of final goods,
the members referred to increasingly numerous examples of successful
efforts to raise such prices and to apparently growing business
expectations that it would be possible to implement such increases
over the months ahead. On balance, the members generally were
persuaded that the economy had attained levels of labor and capital
utilization that implied a strong risk of rising inflation over coming
quarters.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of [masked number of year] (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
at this meeting reviewed the ranges for growth of the monetary and
debt aggregates in [masked number of year] that it had established on a tentative basis
at its meeting in July [masked number of year] . The tentative ranges included expansion
of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for M3, measured from the
fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] . The monitoring
range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt had been set
provisionally at 3 to 7 percent for [masked number of year] . The ranges for M2 and M3
were unchanged from those that the Committee had used in [masked number of year] while
the range for debt was one percentage point lower.
All the members endorsed a proposal to adopt the ranges that
the Committee had set on a tentative basis in July [masked number of year] . While some
acceleration in the growth of the broad monetary aggregates from the
pace in [masked number of year] could be anticipated over the year ahead according to a
staff analysis, monetary expansion within the ranges in question
appeared to be consistent with the moderation in the expansion of
nominal GDP that the members were projecting for [masked number of year] and that they
viewed as desirable to head off increasing inflation. Moreover, the
ranges for the broad monetary aggregates had been reduced over the
past decade to levels that, notably in the case of M2, should now be
consistent over long periods with the Committee's objectives for
stable prices and maximum sustainable economic growth. This outcome
would depend on the restoration over time of the historical velocity
patterns linking the monetary aggregates to broad measures of economic
performance, including a level velocity trend for M2. It was noted in
this regard that until recent years the growth of M3 had tended to
exceed that of M2--a pattern that seemed to be re-emerging--and
therefore a somewhat higher range might be set for M3 than for M2.
However, the members did not believe that a persuasive argument could
be made at this juncture for raising the M3 range, though they did not
want to rule out the option of doing so later, possibly when the
ranges were reviewed at midyear. Indeed, to make the change at this
point might convey a misleading message regarding the Committee's
policy intentions or its confidence in prospective monetary growth
relationships.
The Committee also considered the potential advantages and
disadvantages of setting specific targets for bringing inflation down
and achieving price stability over time. Such targets might provide
an alternative or supplemental approach to the monetary growth ranges,
which had been found to be unreliable guides for monetary policy over
the past several years. The members discussed a number of aspects of
inflation targeting. On the one hand, such targeting would help to
anchor the conduct of monetary policy and progress in meeting these
objectives could enhance the credibility of the Federal Reserve and
perhaps reduce the overall cost of attaining price stability. On the
other hand, close adherence to preset inflation targets could unduly
constrain the Federal Reserve in its efforts to counteract the effects
of cyclical shortfalls in the performance of the economy. The members
agreed that the discussion had been helpful in outlining the issues
and that the subject should be revisited. It was noted in this
connection that the Committee might be asked to comment during the
months ahead on specific Congressional proposals for inflation
targeting.
At the conclusion of its discussion, all the members voted to
approve without change the tentative ranges for [masked number of year] that the
Committee had established in July of last year. In keeping with its
usual procedures under the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, the Committee would
review its ranges at midyear, or sooner if interim conditions
warranted, in light of the growth and velocity behavior of the
aggregates and ongoing economic and financial developments.
Accordingly, the following longer-run policy statement for [masked number of year] was
approved for inclusion in the domestic policy directive.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price
stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this
meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of
1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively,
measured from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth
quarter of [masked number of year] . The Committee anticipated that money
growth within these ranges would be consistent with its
broad policy objectives. The monitoring range for
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was lowered
to 3 to 7 percent for the year. The behavior of the
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of progress toward price level stability,
movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets.