The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
recent developments in foreign exchange markets.  There were no open
market transactions in foreign currencies for System account during
the period since the meeting on [masked date] and thus no vote was
required of the Committee.
The Manager also reported on recent developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in U.S.
government securities and federal agency obligations during the period
[masked date] through [masked date] .  By unanimous vote, the
Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and
financial outlook, and the implementation of monetary policy over the
intermeeting period ahead.  A summary of the economic and financial
information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
expansion of economic activity had moderated appreciably from an
elevated second-quarter pace.  Growth in consumer spending had slowed
noticeably, and higher mortgage rates seemed to be exerting some
modest restraint on housing demand.  While business demand for durable
equipment remained strong, spending on nonresidential structures had
weakened a little.  Business inventory accumulation appeared to have
picked up, although the level of inventories remained modest in
relation to sales.  Employment and production had continued to post
sizable gains in recent months, but the increases were somewhat below
those recorded earlier in the year.  Consumer price inflation,
excluding its food and energy components, had edged lower this year
despite somewhat larger increases in labor compensation.
Private nonfarm payroll employment grew less rapidly over
July and August than it had in the second quarter; aggregate hours
worked by private production workers also expanded at a slower pace
over the two-month period.  Job growth in the services industries was
somewhat lower over the two months compared with that of the second
quarter.  Manufacturing employment changed little on balance over the
July-August period, and construction hiring was down considerably in
August after a July increase that was a little above the pace of the
second quarter.  The civilian unemployment rate declined to 5.1
percent in August.