The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on
developments in foreign exchange markets and on System open market
transactions in foreign currencies during the period [masked date] through [masked date] . By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified
these transactions.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic
financial markets and on System open market transactions in government
securities and federal agency obligations during the period [masked date] through [masked date] . By unanimous vote, the Committee
ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic
and financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over
the intermeeting period ahead. A summary of the economic and
financial information available at the time of the meeting and of the
Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic
policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the
expansion of economic activity had moderated considerably in early
[masked number of year] . Slower growth in consumer spending, associated in part with a
sharp decline in expenditures for motor vehicles, and weakness in
housing purchases were factors in the moderation. Despite signs of
some weakening in final demand, however, further sizable gains had
been recorded in industrial production and payroll employment, and
overall rates of resource utilization remained high. Broad indexes of
consumer and producer prices had risen more rapidly on average over
January and February, but wages had shown no sign of an acceleration.
Nonfarm payroll employment increased considerably over
January and February, although the average monthly advance was
somewhat smaller than that of [masked number of year] . Further brisk job gains were
recorded in the January-February period in manufacturing; hiring in
retail and wholesale trade and in the service-producing sector slowed
a bit; and construction payrolls changed little on balance. The
average workweek of production or nonsupervisory workers remained at a
high level over the two months. The civilian unemployment rate rose
in January but fell back in February to its December level of 5.4
percent.
The expansion in industrial production also moderated in
January and February from the rapid pace of last year. Manufacturing
production grew less rapidly, with output gains down sharply in
February for consumer durable goods and construction supplies. Mining
production continued to be sluggish. By contrast, the output of
utilities surged during the January-February period as winter
temperatures, which had been unusually warm, moved back toward normal,
Capacity utilization rates, which were little changed over the first
two months of the year, remained high.
Retail sales fell in February, reversing most of a sizable
rise in January. The February declines in sales were widespread, with
slippage evident at most types of retail outlets. Most indicators of
housing activity had weakened in recent months in lagged response to
the earlier rise in mortgage interest rates. Housing starts fell
sharply in January and edged still lower in February; these declines
more than erased the gains that had been posted on balance over the
closing months of [masked number of year] . A substantial drop in sales of existing homes
in January (latest data) extended the trend that had been evident for
some months.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods recorded another
strong advance in February. Shipments of office and computing
equipment rebounded in February from declines in December and January,
and demand for most other types of equipment remained brisk. Business
outlays for heavy trucks fell back slightly in February after a surge
in January. While there were tentative signs in the recent orders
data of some deceleration in business equipment spending, the still-growing backlog of unfilled orders suggested further solid expansion
in business spending on equipment. Nonresidential construction
activity had been trending appreciably higher over the past two years;
however, a slowdown in spending by public utilities in December and
January, in an environment of uncertainty related to pending
deregulation, and a third straight monthly decline in permit issuance
for nonresidential structures in February pointed to some softening in
the uptrend.
Business inventory investment surged in January after a
slowdown in December; excluding a large increase in stocks of motor
vehicles at the wholesale and retail levels, inventories rose in
January at about the average rate of the final three quarters of [masked number of year] .
In manufacturing, inventory accumulation outpaced sales in January;
the stocks-to-sales ratio edged higher but was still near historical
lows. At wholesale establishments, inventory accumulation picked up
in January as a large rise in automotive inventories more than offset
a reduced increase in stocks of other goods. The inventory-to-sales
ratio for the sector moved higher in January but remained well within
its range of the last several years. At the retail level, inventories
jumped in January after a slight decline in December; almost all the
rise reflected increased stocks of motor vehicles. The inventory-to-sales ratio for the retail sector as a whole was unchanged in January
and remained near the middle of its range of recent years, at
automotive dealerships, the inventory-to-sales ratio rose sharply
while elsewhere the ratio edged lower.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened sharply in January from its December level and its average
rate in the fourth quarter; some of the increase in the deficit was
due to trade with Mexico, but somewhat distorted seasonal adjustment
factors also may have been involved. The value of exports of goods
and services declined substantially in January after having increased
strongly in November and December. The value of imports rose
considerably in January, continuing the pattern of the fourth quarter.
The export losses and import gains in January were distributed widely
across major trade categories. The pace of economic recovery in the
major foreign industrial countries appeared to have moderated in
recent months. In the fourth quarter, economic activity declined in
Japan and grew more slowly in most of the other major industrial
countries; growth had picked up in Canada. Available data suggested
that in the first quarter economic expansion had slowed in all of the
major foreign industrial countries except Japan, where growth appeared
to be positive despite the Kobe earthquake.
Consumer price increases in January and February were a
little larger than the average monthly rise in [masked number of year] . Food prices were
unchanged on balance over the two-month period, while energy prices
were up only slightly. Producer prices of finished goods increased in
January and February at the same rate as consumer prices; producer
price inflation for the two months also was higher than in [masked number of year] with
a steep rise in gasoline prices in January contributing to the pickup.
Producer prices of intermediate materials surged in the first two
months of this year after having accelerated sharply in the second
half of [masked number of year] . Average hourly earnings of private production or
nonsupervisory workers were unchanged in February after a substantial
rise in January. For the two months combined, hourly earnings
increased at about the same average monthly pace as in [masked number of year] .
At its meeting on [masked date] the Committee
adopted a directive that called for increasing somewhat the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions, taking account of a possible
rise of 1/2 percentage point in the discount rate. The directive
approved by the Committee did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any further adjustments to policy during the
intermeeting period. Accordingly, the directive stated that in the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat greater or
somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions associated with this
directive were expected to be consistent with moderate growth of M2
and M3 over coming months.
On the second day of the meeting, the Board of Governors
approved an increase of one-half percentage point in the discount
rate, to 5-1/4 percent. The rise was made effective immediately and
was passed through fully to interest rates in reserve markets. Open
market operations during the intermeeting period were conducted with a
view to maintaining the tighter policy stance adopted at the meeting
and implemented immediately thereafter. The federal funds rate
averaged a little less than 6 percent over the intermeeting interval,
and adjustment plus seasonal borrowing was a little below anticipated
levels.
Financial market participants generally had expected a
firming in reserve market conditions, and consequently market interest
rates showed little immediate reaction. Subsequently, most market
interest rates declined considerably in response to both incoming data
that were seen as indicating an appreciable slowing in the pace of
economic expansion and statements by Federal Reserve officials that
were viewed as suggesting that the period of monetary policy
tightening might be coming to a close. The largest declines in yields
were concentrated in intermediate- and long-term obligations.
Stronger-than-expected earnings reports coupled with heightened
prospects for sustained, moderate economic expansion and continued low
inflation boosted major indexes of equity prices to record levels.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies fell substantially
further. The dollar's decline was particularly sharp against the
Japanese yen and the German mark, and post-World War II record lows
against these two currencies were recorded. Declines in U.S. interest
rates and concerns about the persistence of large U.S. trade and
fiscal deficits appeared to have contributed to the dollar's drop.
Continuing economic and financial problems in Mexico, which resulted
in further depreciation on balance of the Mexican peso against the
dollar, also seemed to add to negative sentiment toward the dollar
because the process of adjustment in the Mexican economy to the lower
value of the peso was viewed as implying reduced imports from and
increased exports to the United States.
M2 declined, and growth of M3 slowed in February after
sizable January gains; data for the first part of March pointed to
some recovery in both aggregates. M2's weakness in February partly
reflected an unwinding of temporary increases in January of its
volatile components, including demand deposits, overnight repurchase
agreements, and overnight Eurodollars; the weakness also appeared to
be associated with depositor efforts to obtain higher returns by
shifting funds into market instruments. The slowdown in growth of M3
in February was entirely attributable to the decline in M2; its non-M2
component increased substantially further as banks continued to rely
heavily on managed liabilities to fund loan growth. Expansion of
total domestic nonfinancial debt had picked up a little in recent
months.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
growth of economic activity was slowing and for some period ahead
would average a little less than the rate of increase in the economy's
potential output. The pace of the expansion seemed to have slackened
somewhat more than had been anticipated at the last meeting; however,
the recent declines in long-term interest rates and the rally in stock
prices were expected to provide additional support for aggregate
demand later in the year. Moreover, the substantial depreciation of
the dollar against the yen and several European currencies was acting
to offset some of the effects on demand of the previous tightening of
reserve conditions. The forecast continued to anticipate that in the
period ahead consumer spending would be restrained by smaller gains in
real incomes, the substantial degree to which pent-up demands had been
satisfied, and the lagged effects of earlier increases in interest
rates on the demand for durable goods. Business outlays for new
equipment would decelerate substantially in response to slower growth
of sales and profits. Homebuilding was projected to decline somewhat
further in the near term and to remain at somewhat subdued levels for
a time in reflection of the damping effects on housing demand of
slower growth in jobs and incomes and of the earlier rise in mortgage
rates. Developments in Mexico were likely to interrupt only briefly a
strong uptrend in U.S. exports, based on sustained growth in the
economies of other U.S. trading partners. Considerable uncertainty
continued to surround the federal fiscal outlook but, as in the
previous forecast, a moderate pace of deficit reduction was assumed
over the forecast horizon. In the staff's judgment, the economy was
operating beyond its long-run, noninflationary capacity, and there
remained a risk that higher inflation could emerge if the expansion
did not moderate sufficiently.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, the members agreed that the pace of the
economic expansion was moderating, though the extent of the slowdown
was not yet clear. The effects of the policy tightening implemented
since early [masked number of year] seemed to be showing through in interest-sensitive
sectors, and those effects were expected to be reinforced by some
cutback in inventory accumulation from the unsustainable rates of
previous quarters. Quarters of fairly slow growth were not unusual in
a period of expansion. On the whole, however, the economy appeared to
retain considerable forward momentum, with current imbalances
seemingly of a relatively minor nature and in the process of being
corrected. Moreover, the recent declines in long-term interest rates,
if these persisted, could provide fresh support for interest-sensitive
spending later in [masked number of year] and in [masked number of year] . While opinions differed somewhat
with respect to both the likely extent of the slowdown and the
prognosis for inflation, the members generally agreed that the economy
appeared to be on a trajectory toward a more sustainable path for
economic activity. However, a number of members expressed concern
that the slowdown might not be sufficient to relieve the persisting
pressures on labor and capital resources, thereby portending higher
inflation.
In the course of the Committee's discussion, members
reported on widespread signs that business activity, while still quite
strong in many areas, was growing less rapidly on balance. Still, a
number of factors pointed to continued solid expansion. Business
sentiment was generally described as quite positive, though somewhat
less ebullient than in earlier months. Likewise, recent surveys
suggested that consumer confidence remained very favorable, though
down slightly from recent peaks by most measures. In addition to the
favorable recent developments in financial markets, bank lending
policies remained quite accommodative, although business loan growth
had slowed recently after a period of unusual strength.
In their review of developments in key sectors of the
economy, members took note of the sluggishness in consumer spending
that had emerged in recent months in much of the country. To a
considerable extent the recent weakness reflected a sharp reduction in
spending for motor vehicles, but there also were signs in the most
recent data of broader declines in spending, especially for durable
goods other than automobiles. Some reduction in spending for durable
goods could be expected in lagged response to the policy tightening
over the past year, but a few members noted that unusual weather might
have led to the temporary postponement of some discretionary
purchases. In assessing the recent spending patterns, it was
difficult to determine whether they represented a temporary pause or a
more prolonged pullback by consumers. On balance, however, growth in
consumer spending probably would slow somewhat further to a rate more
in line with the expansion in jobs and incomes. Consumer spending
would tend to be sustained, however, by the ready availability of
consumer financing and the rise in bond and stock prices, which had
strengthened household balance sheets and perhaps was helping to
bolster consumer confidence.
The housing market had weakened noticeably according to
incoming data and anecdotal reports from around the country. The
decline in home sales that began in the latter part of [masked number of year] had
persisted, and housing starts had fallen sharply in the early part of
the year as a consequence of the weaker sales and a larger inventory
of unsold homes. Partly because of the higher mortgage rates that had
prevailed for some time, members anticipated still soft housing
demand, particularly for single-family houses. There had been some
reports that recent declines in mortgage interest rates were having a
mitigating effect. In some parts of the country, the weakness in
housing construction was being countered by further improvement in
nonresidential construction activity. In other areas where commercial
real estate conditions remained soft, declines in vacancy rates seemed
to be preparing the way for a pickup in commercial building activity.
Committee members anticipated that growth of business
investment in plant and equipment would moderate from the
extraordinary rate of the last two years but that such investment
would continue to support growth in aggregate final demand during the
forecast period. The demand for durable equipment was expected to
increase more gradually as the growth of economic activity slowed and
business profits tended to flatten out, and the available data on
equipment expenditures thus far in [masked number of year] appeared to be in line with
that expectation. However, some anecdotal reports suggested that
investment in plant and equipment might be stronger than expected in
an environment of tight labor supply and elevated levels of capacity
utilization, intense desires to control costs and improve
competitiveness, and a still relatively low user cost of capital. The
desire for additional production capacity was reflected in spending
for the construction of commercial and industrial structures, which
remained on an uptrend.
The rapid rise in business inventories in recent quarters
had been sustainable in the context of briskly increasing final sales,
but with some further accumulation early in the first quarter and
economic growth projected to moderate, the rate of inventory
investment would have to adjust downward as well. While the timing
and extent could not be anticipated with any precision, a short-term
inventory correction process might already be under way, with firms
initiating cutbacks to production schedules to reflect smaller-than-expected gains in sales over recent months. Members noted that
inventory-to-sales ratios already were at generally low levels and
they anticipated that any desired adjustments to production would be
made quickly. In the circumstances, the size of the inventory
correction and its effect on economic activity would be limited.
Moreover, reports of inventory shortages in some industries suggested
that many firms might raise their desired inventory levels to protect
against shortfalls in materials needed in the production process.
The defeat of the balanced budget amendment in Congress had
clouded the outlook for deficit reduction. Nonetheless, a moderately
restrictive fiscal policy that would provide for some progress toward
a balanced budget during the forecast period was seen as a reasonable
assumption. One member observed that there was a risk of a more
restrictive fiscal policy arising out of the dynamics of the current
political debate. In any event, any progress toward a balanced budget
might be expected to have a favorable effect on domestic financial
markets and perhaps also on the dollar in foreign exchange markets.
Members commented that considerable uncertainty surrounded
the outlook for the external sector, but for now it seemed reasonable
to forecast that this sector would make a small positive contribution,
on balance, to the growth of economic activity over the forecast
period. In the near term, economic developments in Mexico were
leading to lower U.S. exports and higher imports; anecdotal reports
suggested that the effects on trade flows and local business activity
tended to be felt most strongly in states that border Mexico.
However, there were signs that conditions were stabilizing in Mexico,
and more generally the relatively robust growth projected for the
major trading partners of the United States and the lower value of the
dollar now prevailing were expected to foster improvement in the
nation's trade balance.
Members noted that while the pace of the expansion evidently
had slowed, economic activity and utilization of labor and other
producer resources were still at very high levels. Prices of many
materials inputs to the production process had risen sharply, but thus
far there had been only a small pickup in consumer prices. Likewise,
the persisting tightness in many labor markets had not to this point
fostered appreciable increases in wages. The absence of a significant
rise in prices of finished goods or in wages might reflect in some
measure the lags in the inflation transmission process, the fruits of
heavy business investments in new capacity and more productive
equipment in recent years, and perhaps structural changes in business
organization that were raising the economy's capacity for sustained,
noninflationary activity. Members were concerned, however, that
despite continuing competitive pressures and some recent abatement in
materials prices, business firms were reporting greater success in
passing cost increases through to prices. The depreciation of the
dollar also would add to inflationary pressures in the economy. In
these circumstances, the members generally concluded that some
increase in inflation was likely in coming months.
In the Committee's discussion of monetary policy for the
intermeeting period ahead, all the members endorsed a proposal to
maintain an unchanged degree of pressure in reserve markets. The
policy tightening that had been implemented since early [masked number of year] appeared
to be exerting a desired restraining effect on the growth of economic
activity and associated demands for goods and services. But the
extent of the slowing in growth and its effects on inflationary
pressures were not yet clear. On balance, though, the available
evidence tended to suggest that the economy might be moving toward a
growth path for economic activity that would be consistent with
limiting the uptick in inflation that was currently being experienced.
In discussing their policy choices, several members noted the
relatively steep decline in the value of the dollar. However, they
believed that policy should not be directed toward the achievement of
a specific level for the dollar but rather toward the implementation
of an effective anti-inflationary monetary policy, taking account of
all the factors bearing on the economic outlook. In current
circumstances, and given the substantial uncertainties that were
involved, the members believed that it would be prudent to pause and
assess developments before taking any further policy action.
With regard to possible adjustments to policy during the
intermeeting period, most members expressed a preference for an
asymmetric directive tilted toward restraint. These members indicated
that near-term developments were not likely to call for an adjustment
to policy in either direction. Nonetheless, with the economy expected
to be operating in the neighborhood of its potential, the recent rise
in inflation and the risk of an unexpected impulse that could ratchet
inflation even higher suggested that an asymmetric directive would be
more consistent with the Committee's objective of moving over time
toward price stability. The economy retained considerable forward
momentum and, as had often happened in the past, the recent slowdown
in growth could prove to be temporary, with additional monetary
tightening needed at some point to contain inflation. In this
connection a few members indicated that further tightening might well
be needed sooner rather than later. An asymmetric directive also
would provide a clear signal of the Committee's intention to resist
higher inflation.
A few members preferred a symmetric directive. These
members agreed that additional policy tightening might be needed if
inflation began to pick up. However, they saw an undesirably weaker
economic performance as being about equally likely, and in their view
this balance in the risks to the outlook called for the adoption of a
symmetric directive. The Committee's determination to keep inflation
under control would be appropriately conveyed, in their view, through
future actions rather than through the adoption of a tilt toward
restraint. However, these members indicated that they could accept an
asymmetric intermeeting instruction.
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated that they preferred or could support a directive
that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions and that included a bias toward the possible firming of
reserve conditions during the intermeeting period. Accordingly, in
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, the Committee decided
that somewhat greater reserve restraint would be acceptable and
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions contemplated at this
meeting were expected to be consistent with moderate growth of M2 and
M3 over coming months.
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York was authorized and directed, until instructed otherwise by
the Committee, to execute transactions in the System Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that the expansion of economic activity has moderated
considerably in early [masked number of year] . Nonfarm payroll employment
rose appreciably further in January and February, but
at a pace below the average monthly gain in [masked number of year] ; the
civilian unemployment rate, after rising in January,
fell back in February to its December level of 5.4
percent. Advances in industrial production also
moderated in January and February, and capacity
utilization rates generally changed little from already
high levels. Total retail sales were about unchanged
over the two months. Housing starts have declined
somewhat after posting sizable gains on balance during
the closing months of [masked number of year] . Orders for nondefense
capital goods point to a still strong expansion of
spending on business equipment, but with tentative
signs of some deceleration; nonresidential construction
has been trending appreciably higher. The nominal
deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services widened
sharply in January from its average rate in the fourth
quarter. Broad indexes of consumer and producer prices
increased faster on average over January and February.
On [masked date] the Board of Governors
approved an increase from 4-3/4 to 5-1/4 percent in the
discount rate, and in keeping with the Committee's
decision at the [masked date] meeting, the
increase was allowed to show through fully to interest
rates in reserve markets. Nonetheless, most market
interest rates have declined somewhat since the
Committee meeting; the largest declines have been
concentrated in intermediate- and long-term obligations. In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted
value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10
currencies was down substantially further over the
intermeeting period. The Mexican peso has continued to
depreciate against the dollar.
M2 and M3 weakened in February, though data for
the first part of March pointed to some rebound.
Growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt has picked
up a little in recent months.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting on [masked date] established ranges for
growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4
percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter
of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] . The Committee
anticipated that money growth within these ranges would
be consistent with its broad policy objectives. The
monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt was lowered to 3 to 7 percent for the
year. The behavior of the monetary aggregates will
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress
toward price level stability, movements in their
velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, somewhat greater reserve
restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with moderate growth in M2 and M3 over
coming months.