The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on

recent developments in foreign exchange markets.  He indicated that

the swap line drawing by the Bank of Mexico had been repaid in full on

[masked date] .  The Committee ratified that transaction by

unanimous vote.
The Manager also reported on recent developments in domestic

financial markets and on System open market transactions in U.S.

government securities and federal agency obligations during the period

[masked date] through [masked date] .  By unanimous vote, the

Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and

financial outlook, the ranges for the growth of money and debt in

[masked number of year] and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting

period ahead.  A summary of the economic and financial information

available at the time of the meeting and of the Committee's discussion

is provided below, followed by the domestic policy directive that was

approved by the Committee and issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of

New York.
Only a limited amount of new information was available for

this meeting because of delays in government releases; that which was

available, along with anecdotal commentary, suggested that the economy

had been growing relatively slowly in recent months.  Consumer

spending had expanded modestly on balance, growth in business invest-

ment in capital goods appeared to have slackened somewhat recently,

and housing demand seemed to have leveled out.  Slower growth in final

sales was leading to inventory buildups in a few industries and these

buildups, together with the disruptions from government shutdowns and

severe weather, were having a restraining effect on economic activity.

The demand for labor was still growing at a moderate pace, though, and

the unemployment rate remained relatively low.  The recent data on

prices and wages had been mixed, but there was no firm evidence of a

change in underlying inflation trends.
Nonfarm payroll employment continued to expand moderately in

December; the gain was in line with the average monthly increase for

[masked number of year] .  Employment in manufacturing, boosted by the settlement of a

strike at a major aircraft manufacturer, reversed the declines of

October and November.  Construction payrolls rose further in December,

despite unfavorable weather in some parts of the country.  Job growth

remained solid in much of the services industry, although employment

at personnel supply firms was little changed.  The civilian unemploy-

ment rate remained at 5.6 percent in December.
Industrial production edged up in December and for the fourth

quarter as a whole advanced only slightly; industrial activity

remained sluggish in January according to the limited statistical

information that was available.  In December, manufacturing output

rose a bit in association with an increase in motor vehicle assemblies

and aircraft production.  Elsewhere in manufacturing, the growth of

output of office and computing equipment slowed somewhat from the

rapid pace of previous months, and the production of defense and space

equipment and of nondurable consumer goods registered sizable

declines.  The output of utilities was boosted somewhat in December by

the effect of colder-than-average temperatures on the demand for

heating services.  Utilization of total industrial capacity fell

slightly but remained at a moderately elevated level.
Retail sales continued to grow at a relatively modest rate in

December, and the fourth-quarter increase was considerably smaller

than those of the previous two quarters.  In the fourth quarter, lower

spending at general merchandisers offset much of the sales gains

registered at automotive dealerships, furniture and appliance stores,

and building and supply outlets.  Consumer surveys indicated some

deterioration in consumer confidence in January.  Recent indicators

of housing demand and activity were mixed.  Sales of new homes edged

still lower in November (latest data available), and sales of existing

homes declined by a larger amount in December than in November.

However, housing starts rebounded in November from a sizable October

decline, and conditions in mortgage markets remained quite favorable,

led by a further decline in rates.
The sparse statistical data available on business fixed

investment, along with anecdotal information, suggested a moderation

recently in the expansion of business spending on capital goods,

including some slowing of investment in computers.  Investment in

transportation equipment, however, apparently had held up well in the

fourth quarter.  Incoming data on construction contracts pointed to

some slowing in the growth of nonresidential building activity from a

relatively brisk pace during most of [masked number of year] .
The information available on business inventories suggested

that inventory imbalances might have emerged in a few sectors in

association with weaker-than-expected sales.  Motor vehicle

inventories were at elevated levels compared with sales in late [masked number of year] and manufacturers responded by offering incentive packages on new cars

and trucks and by adjusting downward their January production

schedules.  Data on manufacturing and retail trade inventories for

November had been delayed, but published information on inventories

held by wholesale distributors indicated a decline in that month,

reversing part of October's sizable run-up.  Much of the decline

occurred in nondurable goods, although machinery distributors also

reported a sizable liquidation.  The inventory-sales ratio for the

wholesale trade sector edged down in November but remained near the

high end of its range in recent years.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services

narrowed in October from its average rate in the third quarter.  The

value of imports declined by more than the value of exports.  Much of

the contraction in imports reflected reductions in oil and automotive

products that more than offset another strong rise in computer goods.

For exports, an advance in machinery exports to record levels was

outweighed by a reduction in shipments of agricultural and automotive

products.  Available data on economic activity in the major foreign

industrial countries suggested that the pace of expansion in Europe

had slowed further on average while growth in Japan had picked up a

little.
Recent data suggested little change in underlying inflation

trends.  Consumer prices increased slightly in December after being

unchanged in November; food prices were quiescent over the two-month

period while energy prices rose on balance, with a December rebound

more than offsetting a sizable November drop.  Excluding food and

energy items, consumer prices were up modestly over the November-

December period and for all of [masked number of year] advanced slightly more than in

[masked number of year] .  Producer prices of finished goods were up considerably in

November and December after having risen slowly in earlier months; in

large part, the price increases late in the year reflected sharp

upward movements in both finished foods and finished energy prices.

For [masked number of year] producer prices of finished goods other than food and energy

rose at a subdued pace, though somewhat more than in [masked number of year] .  Commodity

prices had been mixed recently after trending down earlier.  Average

hourly earnings of production and nonsupervisory workers increased

somewhat in December after having been unchanged in November.

Increases in average hourly earnings had been trending up over the

past several years.
At its meeting on [masked date] the Committee adopted a

directive that called for some slight easing in the degree of pressure

on reserve positions, which was expected to result in a decline in the

federal funds rate from around 5-3/4 percent to around 5-1/2 percent.

The directive did not include a presumption about the likely direction

of any adjustments to policy during the intermeeting period.

Accordingly, the directive stated that in the context of the

Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable

economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,

financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve

restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable

during the intermeeting period.  The reserve conditions associated

with this directive were expected to be consistent with moderate

growth of M2 and M3 over coming months.
After the meeting, open market operations were directed

initially toward implementing the slight easing in the degree of

reserve pressure that had been adopted by the Committee and thereafter

toward maintaining this new reserve posture.  Operations were

complicated by large swings in reserve demands associated with year-

end pressures and the adverse effects of unusually severe winter

weather on check clearings.  Although the federal funds rate exhibited

somewhat greater volatility than normal over the period, it

nonetheless averaged close to the expected level of 5-1/2 percent.

The occasional periods of firmness in reserve market conditions

contributed to higher adjustment plus seasonal borrowing, on average,

over the period.
Most market interest rates had declined somewhat further over

the period after the [masked date] meeting.  Rates moved lower

immediately after the policy easing action, and most fell still more

on balance over the remainder of the intermeeting interval in response

to incoming information about the economy and the prospects for fiscal

policy, at least in the near term.  Both were seen as suggesting

slower economic expansion for a time and an increased likelihood of

additional easing of monetary policy in coming months.  With bond

yields down on balance, and occasionally approaching two-year lows,

major indexes of equity prices advanced sharply further.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other

G-10 currencies continued to rise over the intermeeting period despite

the decline in U.S. interest rates.  The dollar's upward movement

against the German mark and other European currencies was associated

with increasing indications of further weakening of economic expansion

in key European countries and greater declines in interest rates in

those countries than in the United States.  The dollar's appreciation

relative to the Japanese yen appeared to be related in part to a

narrowing of Japan's trade and current account surpluses.  The dollar

was unchanged on balance against the Canadian dollar, while the

Mexican peso rose considerably in relation to the dollar.
Growth of M2 and M3 strengthened in December and January.

The pickup in M2 growth partly reflected the effect of recent declines

in short-term interest rates; those declines had made money market

instruments less attractive relative to household savings accounts in

M2, whose offering rates tend to be adjusted downward with a

considerable lag.  In addition, the flattening of the term structure

of interest rates had lessened the comparative attractiveness of bond

mutual funds, which had continued to experience only light inflows.

Faster growth of M3 in December and January was associated with both

the pickup in M2 expansion and the issuance of additional large time

deposits to help finance a noticeable step-up in bank loan demand in

January.  The expansion of M2 from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the

fourth quarter of [masked number of year] was in the upper half of the Committee's annual

range, and M3 grew at the upper end of its range.  Growth of total

domestic nonfinancial debt had been moderate in recent months, and for

the year was near the midpoint of this aggregate's monitoring range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that

economic activity would expand at a relatively slow pace over the near

term.  This forecast was not materially different from that prepared

for the December meeting, except for a slightly weaker outlook for the

current quarter that was related in part to an inventory correction

and the effects of unusually severe winter weather on spending and

output.  Over the remainder of the two-year forecast horizon, the

economy was expected to grow generally along its estimated potential.

Consumer spending was anticipated to keep pace with the growth of

disposable income; concerns about job security remained and consumer

debt burdens had risen further, but the still-ample availability of

credit and the substantial rise in the value of household equity

holdings would support further increases in consumption.  The further

decline in mortgage rates recently from already-favorable levels would

help to sustain homebuilding activity at a relatively high level.

With sales and profits projected to grow more slowly, and with

utilization of existing capacity having eased considerably, business

investment in new equipment and structures was expected to expand at a

more moderate rate.  In light of the recent strengthening of the

dollar, the external sector was expected to exert a small restraining

influence on real activity over the projection period as a whole.

Much uncertainty still surrounded the fiscal outlook, but the recent

impasse in the budget negotiations between the Administration and the

Congress suggested a lower degree of fiscal restraint over coming

years than had been assumed in the previous forecast.  Given the

projected outlook, rates of utilization of labor and capital resources

and of inflation were not expected to change materially.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective

economic activity, members noted a number of temporary factors that

were retarding the expansion.  The weakness in business activity this

winter was to some extent the result of the partial shutdown of the

federal government and the severe storms in a number of regions; both

clearly were transitory influences on the economy.  Growth of economic

activity also was being constrained by production cutbacks stemming

from efforts to bring stocks into better alignment with disappointing

sales in a number of industries.  Even so, in the absence of major

overhangs in inventories of business equipment and consumer durables,

and given favorable conditions in financial markets, members believed

that a resumption of moderate, sustainable growth after a relatively

brief period of weakness was the most likely outlook for the economy.

At the same time, many observed that the risks to such an outcome did

not seem balanced.  A number of concerns, including the extent of the

damping effects of high debt loads and employment uncertainty on

consumption and questions about the sources of further export growth,

suggested the possibility of sluggish expansion, while possible

developments on the upside were more difficult to identify.  With

resource use unlikely to vary appreciably, the members generally

expected no significant change in the underlying inflation picture

over the year ahead.  The recent performance of inflation had some

encouraging aspects, and the odds on greater price pressures seemed

relatively small at this time.
In keeping with the practice at meetings when the Committee

establishes its long-run ranges for growth of the money and debt

aggregates, the members of the Committee and the Federal Reserve Bank

presidents not currently serving as members had prepared individual

projections of economic activity, the rate of unemployment, and

inflation for the year [masked number of year] .  Measured on the basis of chain-weighted

indexes, the forecasts of the growth in real GDP had a central

tendency of 2 to 2-1/4 percent and a full range of 1-1/2 to 2-1/2

percent for the period from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth

quarter of [masked number of year] .  The members and nonmember presidents generally

anticipated that economic expansion in line with their forecasts would

be associated with employment growth close to that of the labor force.

Accordingly, their forecasts of the civilian rate of unemployment in

the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] were near the current level, with a central

tendency of 5-1/2 to 5-3/4 percent and a full range of 5-1/2 to 6

percent.  Projections of the rate of inflation, as reflected in the

consumer price index, had a central tendency of 2-3/4 to 3 percent;

that central tendency was on the high side of the outcome for [masked number of year] when the rise in the index was held down by damped increases in food

prices and declines in energy prices--but a few of the forecasts

anticipated a slightly lower rate of inflation.
In their review of developments across the nation, the

Federal Reserve Bank presidents reported modest growth in most major

areas of the country.  Many referred, however, to an admixture of

strengths and weaknesses in their local economies, and a majority

observed that on balance growth in regional business activity appeared

to have slowed in the last few months.  In keeping with the data

available for the nation as a whole, the slowing seemed to be

concentrated in manufacturing and especially at firms producing motor

vehicles and parts.  Some presidents referred to relatively negative,

or at least cautious, sentiment among many of their business contacts.
Much of the recent softening in economic activity appeared to

arise from production cutbacks in various sectors of the economy where

involuntary accumulation of inventories seemed to have occurred as a

result of weaker sales trends in the past few months.  The members

expected this inventory adjustment process to have a relatively

pronounced effect on production and overall business activity in the

current quarter and perhaps to some extent in the second.  While a

greater-than-expected inventory adjustment with spreading effects

through the economy could not be ruled out, the underlying strength of

demand was likely to be sufficient to restore and sustain moderate

growth in overall economic activity as the current inventory and

production adjustments subsided.
With regard to consumer spending, members referred to overall

indications of lackluster retail sales during the holiday season and

into January.  The anecdotal commentary on retail sales attributed

some of the recent weakness in a number of areas to the clearly

temporary effects of unusually severe winter weather and the partial

shutdown of the federal government.  The members anticipated that

moderate growth in retail sales would resume, though some felt that

the consumer sector might remain vulnerable on the downside.  The

consumer spending outlook was complicated by a number of

crosscurrents.  Negative factors cited by the members included ongoing

concerns about job security that were being sustained by a continuing

stream of workforce reduction announcements by major business

concerns, increased consumer debt burdens that were showing up in

rising delinquency rates on some types of loans, and the apparent

satisfaction of much of the earlier pent-up demand for consumer

durables.  On the positive side, reduced interest rates, still readily

available credit, and the accumulation of financial wealth from the

sharp rise in stock and bond prices were seen as likely to support

continuing gains in consumer spending.
Further increases in business fixed investment were viewed as

a likely prospect for the year ahead, though the growth of such

investment probably would be well below the strong pace experienced

earlier in the current cyclical expansion.  Anecdotal reports

indicated continuing strength in nonresidential construction in some

parts of the country, but declining rates of capacity utilization

augured reduced growth going forward.  The expansion of investment in

producers' durable equipment also was expected to slow, but from a

pace that had seemed unsustainable.  While appreciable further growth

could be expected in expenditures for high-tech equipment as business

firms continued to focus on improving the efficiency of their

operations in a highly competitive environment, spending for other

types of equipment was likely to be sluggish.  Members noted in

particular the prospects for weaker business spending for motor

vehicles, especially for heavy trucks.  However, the fundamental

determinants of investment in business equipment, including the

reduced cost of financing such investment, remained positive and this

sector of the economy should continue to provide considerable impetus

to the expansion.
The members also viewed the considerable decline that had

occurred in mortgage interest rates and the ample availability of

housing finance as key factors in their forecasts of sustained

residential construction at relatively high levels.  Adverse weather

conditions appeared to have retarded home building activity in a

number of areas in recent weeks, but several members commented that

underlying trends in housing demand were favorable and that

residential construction had remained relatively strong in several

parts of the country.
The outlook for fiscal policy was uncertain, especially with

regard to whether longer-term spending and taxation measures would be

enacted to implement the goal of a balanced federal budget by the year

[masked number of year] .  For the year immediately ahead, however, the members continued

to anticipate considerable restraint in federal spending, partly as a

byproduct of the current budget debate between the Congress and the

Administration.  With regard to the external sector of the economy,

prospects for economic growth in major trading partners--led by

developments in Europe--appeared to have weakened, and the recent

appreciation of the dollar in the foreign exchange markets also might

tend to damp net exports.  Consequently, several members saw downside

risks in the foreign trade sector over the year ahead.
The members anticipated that inflation would remain contained

in [masked number of year] but they did not expect significant progress toward more

stable prices.  They referred to crosscurrents bearing on the outlook

for wages and prices in the year ahead.  Factors pointing to

potentially higher inflation included increased pressures on food

prices stemming from disappointing harvests in some areas and

relatively low grain supplies.  More generally, resource utilization

was expected to remain high and greater pressures could emerge in

labor and product markets.  Members noted that one broad measure of

wages had picked up and that there was a small rise in the number of

anecdotal reports indicating that labor shortages were contributing to

higher wages in some parts of the country.  In addition, unusually

muted increases in the costs of worker benefits had been holding down

overall compensation costs, and this pattern might not persist.  On

the other hand, high levels of resource utilization had been

associated for some time with lower rates of growth in costs than

would have been anticipated on the basis of historical experience.  In

particular, a general sense of job insecurity in a period of major

business restructurings was holding down increases in labor

compensation.  In an environment of strong competition, which was

preventing many businesses from passing on rising costs through higher

prices, firms continued to focus on efforts to control costs by

improving the efficiency of their operations, and this was helping to

hold down inflation.  An apparent decline in inflationary expectations

also would provide a moderating influence on inflation trends in the

period ahead.  While most of the members saw little reason to

anticipate appreciably lower inflation over the year ahead, they also

viewed the odds on a pickup in inflation as fairly low; they could see

possible reasons for optimism on the long-run trend in inflation; and

they generally remained confident that further progress toward price

stability would be made over the longer term.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and

Balanced Growth Act of [masked number of year] (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee

reviewed the ranges for growth of the monetary and debt aggregates in

[masked number of year] that it had established on a tentative basis at its meeting in

July [masked number of year] .  The tentative ranges included expansion of 1 to 5 percent

for M2 and 2 to 6 percent for M3, measured from the fourth quarter of

[masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] .  The monitoring range for growth

of total domestic nonfinancial debt was provisionally set at 3 to 7

percent for [masked number of year] .  The tentative ranges for [masked number of year] were unchanged from

the actual ranges for [masked number of year] .  In July, the range for M3 had been raised

by two percentage points to reflect developments that seemed to be

fostering a return to the historical pattern of somewhat faster growth

in M3 than in M2.
In their discussion, the members took note of a staff

analysis which indicated that monetary expansion consistent with the

moderate growth of nominal GDP that the members were projecting for

[masked number of year] most likely would be around the upper ends of the tentative

ranges adopted last July.  M2 and M3 velocity over the past couple of

years had conformed more closely on balance with historical patterns,

and the projections assumed that this behavior would continue in

[masked number of year] .  In light of the experience of earlier years, however, when the

velocities of these aggregates had exhibited pronounced atypical

behavior, substantial uncertainty still surrounded any projections of

monetary expansion and the linkage between particular rates of money

growth and the basic objectives of monetary policy.
Most members endorsed a proposal to adopt the relatively low

ranges for growth of M2 and M3 in [masked number of year] that the Committee had set on a

tentative basis in July [masked number of year] .  These members favored retention of the

tentative ranges because they could be viewed as benchmarks for money

growth that would be associated with price stability, assuming

behavior of velocity in line with historical experience, and a

reaffirmation of those ranges would underscore the Committee's

commitment to a policy of achieving price stability over the longer

term.  Some members also noted that any adjustment of these ranges to

align them more fully with projections of money growth consistent with

the Committee's expectations for expansion of the economy and prices

in [masked number of year] could be misinterpreted.  Such an action might be seen as

suggesting that the Committee had a greater degree of confidence in

the relationship between money growth and broad measures of economic

performance than was warranted by its current understanding of that

relationship or that the Committee was now placing greater emphasis on

the broad monetary aggregates as a gauge of the thrust of monetary

policy.
Two members favored somewhat higher growth ranges for M2 and

M3 in [masked number of year] .  They noted that the expansion of these broad aggregates

was anticipated to be around the upper ends of their tentative ranges,

and perhaps even higher, given the Committee's expectations for the

performance of the economy and prices.  In their view, the higher

ranges would be more consistent with what they saw as the Committee's

obligations under the Federal Reserve Act to set ranges consistent

with expected or desired economic outcomes for the year, and the

reasons for establishing those ranges could easily be set forth and

understood as an appropriate technical adjustment that would not imply

any lessened commitment to the Committee's price stability goal.
The Committee unanimously preferred to retain the 3 to 7

percent range for total domestic nonfinancial debt in [masked number of year] .  This

position took account of a staff projection indicating that the debt

aggregate was likely to continue to grow at a rate generally in line

with the expansion of nominal GDP, although some moderation in private

credit demands was anticipated and there were indications that lenders

were no longer easing their terms and conditions for granting credit

to consumers and businesses.
At the conclusion of its discussion, the Committee voted to

approve without change the tentative ranges for [masked number of year] that it had

established in July of last year.  In keeping with its usual procedures
under the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, the Committee would review its

ranges at midyear, or sooner if interim conditions warranted, in light

of the growth and velocity behavior of the aggregates and ongoing

economic and financial developments.  Accordingly, the following

longer-run policy statement for [masked number of year] was approved for inclusion in

the domestic policy directive:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary

and financial conditions that will foster price

stability and promote sustainable growth in output.

In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at

this meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and

M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6 percent respectively,

measured from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth

quarter of [masked number of year] .  The monitoring range for growth of

total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 3 to 7

percent for the year.  The behavior of the monetary

aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light

of progress toward price level stability, movements in

their velocities, and developments in the economy and

financial markets.