The information reviewed at this meeting indicated that
economic activity recorded a strong advance during the closing months
of [masked number of year] and the limited data available on production and employment
suggested appreciable further gains in the early weeks of this year.
Housing starts had strengthened substantially in the fourth quarter of
last year, and business fixed investment had registered a sharp rise.
Increases in broad indexes of consumer and producer prices, excluding
their food and energy components, had been somewhat larger in recent
months than earlier in [masked number of year] and prices of a number of commodities had
turned up.
Assessment of the January labor market data was complicated
by statistical revisions and weather-related reporting problems, but a
variety of indicators pointed convincingly to a further strengthening
in the demand for labor. Total nonfarm payroll employment posted
a small gain in January after a sizable December increase.
Manufacturing employment rose for a fourth consecutive month, with
gains again concentrated in motor vehicles. Construction payrolls
edged down, evidently reflecting the adverse effects of severe winter
weather. The total number of jobs in the services industries was
unchanged in January, but the inclement weather apparently held down
employment in some segments of this sector as well. The average
workweek of production or nonsupervisory workers rose in January to
its highest level in almost five years; for manufacturing, the average
workweek remained at its post-World War II high for a third
consecutive month. The civilian unemployment rate, calculated on a
new basis, was 6.7 percent in January.
Industrial production increased appreciably further in
December, and the available information suggested a considerable rise
in January. In December, the advance in manufacturing was led by the
motor vehicle and computing equipment industries. Sizable increases
in materials and construction supplies also were recorded. On the
other hand, the output of consumer goods other than motor vehicles was
sluggish, and the production of aircraft and defense and space
equipment continued to shrink. Total utilization of manufacturing
capacity rose again in December and reached a relatively high level,
judged against historical experience.
Consumer spending, as measured by real personal consumption
expenditures, posted another solid increase in the fourth quarter, and
strong sales of motor vehicles in January suggested continued buoyancy
in consumer demand. In the fourth quarter, real outlays on motor
vehicles surged, and spending on other durable goods--notably
furniture, appliances and other household equipment--registered
further large gains. By contrast, real outlays for nondurable goods
and services rose only moderately. Housing starts jumped in December,
with both single-family and multifamily starts sharing in the advance.
For [masked number of year] as a whole, housing starts were at their highest annual total
in four years. Sales of new homes were up sharply in November, and
sales of existing homes ended the year at the highest monthly level in
the twenty-five year history of the series.
Real business fixed investment recorded a very large increase
in the fourth quarter. Business spending for equipment, notably for
information processing equipment, was up sharply for a seventh
straight quarter. The strength evident in recent orders for
nondefense capital goods pointed to further gains in shipments of
these goods in early [masked number of year] . Outlays for nonresidential structures in
the fourth quarter posted their largest quarterly rise in six years;
the increases were spread across a broad array of categories other
than office buildings. Construction permits continued to rise in the
fourth quarter, suggesting further growth of investment in
nonresidential structures in the near term.
Business inventories remained generally well aligned with
sales through November, the most recent month for which complete data
were available. In manufacturing, inventory stocks fell in December
after edging lower in November: with brisk gains in shipments in both
months, the ratio of stocks to shipments fell further from levels that
already were low by historical standards. At the wholesale level,
inventories rose moderately in November after little change in the
preceding two months. The inventory-to-sales ratio for this sector
had changed little since May. Retail inventories expanded
substantially in November for a third straight month. The buildup of
stocks might have been in anticipation of robust holiday sales, but
for some retail businesses, particularly general merchandise stores,
the increases coincided with weak sales. For the retail sector as a
whole, the inventory-to-sales ratio was up slightly in November.
The average nominal U.S. merchandise trade deficit for the
October-November period was about the same as its average rate in the
third quarter. The value of exports was up for the two-month period,
with the increase occurring largely in machinery, automotive products,
and aircraft. The higher value of imports for the two-month period
reflected, as had been the case earlier in [masked number of year] greater imports of
consumer goods, automotive products, and machinery. Trends in
economic activity in the major foreign industrial countries appeared
to have diverged further in the fourth quarter. Moderate growth
appeared to be continuing in Canada and the United Kingdom, but
economic activity seemed to be growing more slowly or to have turned
down in Japan, western Germany, and France.
Producer prices of finished goods were down slightly in
December after being unchanged in November. Excluding the food and
energy components, producer prices edged higher in December and were
up slightly for the year as a whole. At the retail level, consumer
prices rose modestly in November and December, with energy price
declines holding down the increase in the overall index. For items
other than food and energy, prices advanced in the two months at a
slightly faster pace than that seen over previous months of the year;
for [masked number of year] as a whole, the increase was about the same as in [masked number of year] .
Hourly compensation of private industry workers increased in the
fourth quarter at the same pace as in the third quarter. For [masked number of year] the rise in hourly compensation was little changed from the previous
year. Average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers
rose sharply in January, but for the twelve months ended in January,
the increase was the same as that recorded for the previous twelve
months.
At its meeting on [masked date] the Committee adopted a
directive that called for maintaining the existing degree of pressure
on reserve positions and that did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any adjustment to policy during the intermeeting
period. Accordingly, the directive indicated that in the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater or
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the
intermeeting period. The reserve conditions associated with this
directive were expected to be consistent with modest growth of M2 and
M3 over the following months.
Open market operations were directed toward maintaining the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions throughout the
intermeeting period. Additional reserves were supplied to the banking
system on a temporary basis around year-end to meet seasonal movements
in currency and required reserves as well as an enlarged demand for
excess reserves. For the intermeeting period as a whole, the federal
funds rate remained close to 3 percent while adjustment plus seasonal
borrowing averaged somewhat more than anticipated.
Most market interest rates declined slightly during the
intermeeting period, and major indexes of stock prices posted new
highs. Market participants saw the incoming news on inflation as
encouraging; still, they viewed the economy as relatively robust, and
on balance they deemed a firming of monetary policy to counteract a
potential buildup of inflation pressures as likely in the next few
months, but probably not in the very near term.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the
dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies changed little on balance
over the intermeeting period. The dollar fell against the yen in the
context of somewhat higher Japanese interest rates and renewed
expressions of U.S. concern about bilateral trade issues. The dollar
appreciated slightly relative to the German mark and other European
currencies against the background of relatively strong U.S. economic
data and generally sluggish economic activity in continental Europe.
Growth of the broad monetary aggregates, though a little
faster than in most of [masked number of year] remained relatively slow over December
and January. Investors evidently continued to find low-yielding
deposits less appealing than stock and bond mutual funds, although
recent inflows to bond funds appeared to have been at a slower rate
than that seen over most of [masked number of year] . For the year [masked number of year] growth of both
M2 and M3 was estimated to have been slightly above the lower ends of
the Committee's ranges. Private borrowing had picked up in recent
months, and total domestic nonfinancial debt expanded at a somewhat
faster, though still moderate, pace in the fourth quarter; for the
year, nonfinancial debt was estimated to have been in the lower half
of the Committee's monitoring range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
economic expansion would slow from the very strong pace of the fourth
quarter, but that the economy still would advance in [masked number of year] at a rate
somewhat in excess of the growth of potential. The severe winter
weather over much of the country and the California earthquake would
tend to distort economic indicators for the early part of the year:
however, taken together, these developments were not expected to have
a material or lasting effect on the overall level of activity or
prices. Consumer spending, which for some time had tended to outpace
the growth of disposable income, was projected to increase at a rate
more in line with incomes. Business fixed investment was expected to
decelerate gradually from the very rapid rate of [masked number of year] reflecting the
diminishing effect of the earlier pickup in output growth, the slower
growth of corporate cash flow, and a less rapid decline in the cost of
capital. Homebuilding activity, driven by the greatly improved
affordability of housing and increased confidence in employment
prospects, was anticipated to continue at a relatively brisk pace
through much of the year. Exports were projected to strengthen
somewhat, bolstered by some pickup in foreign economic growth, and
fiscal restraint was expected to exert a reduced drag on spending. In
light of the limited margins of slack in labor and product markets
that were anticipated to prevail over the forecast horizon, the
ongoing expansion was projected to be associated with only a slight
further reduction in the core rate of inflation.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members commented that the economy had entered
the new year with appreciable forward momentum and that the expansion
was likely to be sustained over the year ahead at a pace somewhat
above the economy's long-run potential. The very rapid rate of
economic growth now indicated for the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] clearly
could not be maintained. Much of the recent impetus to the expansion
stemmed from a surge in expenditures on housing, business equipment,
and consumer durables. Such spending had reached a very high level in
relation to underlying demands so that the pace of additional
increases undoubtedly would moderate during the course of [masked number of year] .
Still, the economic expansion seemed to have considerable momentum,
largely as a consequence of diminishing balance sheet constraints and
generally favorable financial conditions spurred by a highly
accommodative monetary policy. As a consequence, a number of members
expressed the view that the risks were on the upside of a moderate
growth forecast. In the context of low and decreasing slack in the
economy, little further progress would be made toward price stability
in [masked number of year] and there was a distinct risk of higher inflation at some
point if monetary policy were not adjusted. While broad measures of
inflation did not on the whole suggest any changes in inflation
trends, some members noted that a number of commodity prices had
turned up in recent months, and they referred to still scattered but
increasing anecdotal reports that some business firms were paying
slightly higher prices for various materials purchased for use in the
production process.
In keeping with the practice at meetings when the Committee
establishes its long-run ranges for growth of the money and debt
aggregates, the Committee members and the Federal Reserve Bank
presidents not currently serving as members had prepared projections
of economic activity, the rate of unemployment, and inflation for
[masked number of year] . The central tendency of the forecasts pointed to somewhat
faster economic growth this year than currently was estimated for
[masked number of year] . The anticipated rate of economic expansion was expected to
foster a limited further drop in the rate of unemployment by the
fourth quarter of this year. With the slack in productive resources
expected to diminish further to a quite low level, price and cost
pressures were unlikely to abate significantly: indeed, price
increases in [masked number of year] could exceed those of [masked number of year] when inflation had been
held down by favorable developments in energy prices. Measured from
the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] the
forecasts for growth of real GDP had a central tendency of 3 to 3-1/4
percent and a full range of 2-1/2 to 3-3/4 percent. Projections of
the civilian rate of unemployment in the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] were
all in a range of 6-1/2 to 6-3/4 percent calculated on the basis of
the new survey recently introduced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
For the CPI, the central tendency of the forecasts for the period from
the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] was centered
on increases of about 3 percent within a range of 2-1/4 to 4 percent,
and for nominal GDP the forecasts were clustered in a range of 5-1/2
to 6 percent for the year.
In the Committee's review of factors underlying recent
developments, members observed that generally favorable financial
conditions provided a backdrop conducive to further robust expansion
in business activity. Much of the recent strengthening in economic
growth was generated by increased spending in interest-sensitive
sectors of the economy such as housing in response to relatively low
interest rates. Generally buoyant equity markets, a readier
availability of financing from lending institutions, and the
strengthened financial condition of businesses and households also
were cited as factors tending to boost economic activity. Balance
sheet restructuring activities appeared to have slackened markedly,
and while balance sheet adjustments probably were still being made,
the latter seemed to be exerting much less restraint on the
willingness of businesses and especially households to spend and to
incur new debt to finance growing expenditures.
In their reports on developments across the nation, members
commented on widespread indications of improving economic activity,
including some strengthening in regions that earlier were
characterized by stagnant business conditions. Some areas continued
to be affected adversely by special factors, especially by spending
cutbacks in defense and aerospace industries. California was a
notable example, but a range of indicators suggested that the
California economy might be stabilizing, albeit at a depressed level.
after an extended period of declining activity. Mirroring these
developments, business sentiment was characterized as generally
optimistic around the nation. While business executives remained
cautious in their hiring practices, the expansion in business activity
was fostering sizable overall gains in employment even in areas where
some major business concerns were reducing their workforces. A few
large firms that previously had frozen or reduced their payrolls were
now reported to be hiring additional workers.
Turning to prospective developments in key sectors of the
economy, the members anticipated that the expansion in consumer
expenditures would be well maintained during [masked number of year] though the growth
in such spending probably would moderate to a pace more in line with
gains in disposable income. The available data on retail sales since
the holiday period were still limited, but anecdotal reports pointed
to continuing momentum in several parts of the country. Winter storms
had hindered sales in a number of areas, but according to some retail
contacts the adverse effects were likely to be temporary. In any
event, the very rapid rates of growth in sales of automobiles and
other consumer durables were not sustainable, and already high
consumer debt ratios would be a further inhibiting factor. It was
noted in this connection that consumer debt had become more
concentrated over the course of recent years among consumer groups
that were most likely to borrow to help finance their spending, with
the result that the ability of such consumers to incur additional
indebtedness could be diminished. Higher taxes confronting some
households also were cited as a negative factor in the outlook for the
consumer sector. On balance, however, while the prospects for
consumer spending clearly were not free of uncertainty, the marked
improvement in consumer confidence and favorable financial conditions
would provide a setting conducive to sustained moderate growth in
consumer expenditures.
The improvement in consumer sentiment together with the
availability of relatively low cost financing had fostered very strong
growth in housing construction over the closing months of [masked number of year] and,
adjusting for seasonal weather conditions, anecdotal reports from many
areas suggested a continued robust performance in this sector of the
economy in the early weeks of this year. The strength in housing
activity had induced increases in the costs of lumber and other
building materials, and shortages of skilled construction workers were
reported in some areas. Despite these developments, prices of new
homes did not appear at this point to be under significant upward
pressure. Looking ahead, with housing construction already at high
levels, further gains over the course of [masked number of year] were expected to be
substantially below those recorded in recent quarters.
Business fixed investment was likely to be sustained by
continuing efforts to modernize production facilities in order to
achieve more efficient operations in highly competitive domestic and
world markets. The gains in such investment had been concentrated in
expenditures for equipment, and while new orders pointed to further
brisk growth in the months ahead, increases in such expenditures were
likely to moderate over time. At the same time, growing economic
activity and associated declines in commercial and industrial vacancy
rates, at least in some parts of the country, suggested that nonresidential building construction other than office structures would post
sizable increases over the year. Rebuilding activity following the
earthquake in California would stimulate engineering and construction
in the Los Angeles area over the quarters ahead.
Fiscal policy and foreign trade had exerted retarding effects
on the economy in [masked number of year] . While the response of the economy to fiscal
restraint and the outlook for export markets remained subject to
substantial uncertainty, both fiscal policy and the trade deficit were
expected at this point to be less negative factors in the performance
of the economy during [masked number of year] . With regard to the outlook for fiscal
policy, the downtrend in defense spending was projected to moderate
and to contribute to a smaller net decline in overall federal
government expenditures on goods and services in [masked number of year] . It was noted
that the widespread political support of efforts to curtail federal
government deficits could be expected to continue to contain new
federal spending initiatives. With regard to the outlook for U.S.
exports, more accommodative fiscal or monetary policies abroad were
expected to foster a gradual improvement in rates of economic growth
in major foreign industrial countries with beneficial effects on the
demand from those countries for U.S. goods and services. One member
also commented that NAFTA already seemed to be having a favorable
effect on some exports to Mexico.
One sector of the economy that was viewed as a source of
particular uncertainty was the outlook for inventories. Business
firms continued to maintain tight control over their inventories, and
in general the latter were at quite low levels in relation to sales.
Indeed, there were some anecdotal reports that inventory shortfalls
had resulted in the loss of sales in recent months. Lean inventory
levels in the context of diminishing slack in labor and product
markets raised concerns about the potential for increasing capacity
pressures should strong demands persist that would tend to deplete
existing inventories and lead to efforts not only to rebuild but to
increase them. Thus far, there were few signs of developments such as
significant increases in delivery lead times or in the costs of goods
purchased by business firms that in the past had triggered substantial
inventory buildups. However, there were ample precedents in the
history of business cycle expansions of efforts to accumulate large
inventories in periods when strong final demands already were exerting
inflationary pressures in the economy.
The members generally expressed concern about a buildup in
inflationary pressures during the year ahead, especially if what they
currently viewed as a very accommodative monetary policy were
maintained. A number of members emphasized that even with the
substantial slowing that they anticipated in the rate of economic
expansion from the very rapid growth in the fourth quarter, overall
margins of slack in labor and product markets, already reduced to
fairly modest levels, would shrink further in the quarters ahead with
the clear possibility that various imbalances and added inflation
would emerge in the absence of monetary tightening actions.
Continuing upward impetus to food prices, resulting from the adverse
weather conditions during [masked number of year] and the likelihood that energy prices
would not decline further and might in fact turn up in an environment
of somewhat stronger worldwide demand for energy products could add to
overall price pressures.
The members acknowledged that broad measures of prices and
wages had displayed mixed patterns over recent months and that on the
whole they did not yet point to any clear change in inflation trends.
However, some other indicators were more disquieting. One example was
the growing, though still limited, number of anecdotal reports of
shortages of skilled workers in some parts of the country or
occupations, notably construction. Moreover, there were more reports
of rising prices for products being purchased by business firms for
use in the production process and in turn of successful efforts by
businesses to raise their own prices in order to pass on higher costs
or to improve their profit margins. More generally, many commodity
prices had increased over the past several weeks. On the positive
side, competitive pressures remained intense in many markets,
augmented in markets for numerous products by competition from foreign
producers. Some members also commented that the tradeoff between
economic growth and inflation would be improved over the year ahead to
the extent that the credibility of the System's anti-inflationary
policy was maintained.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of [masked number of year] (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
at this meeting reviewed the ranges for growth of the monetary and
debt aggregates in [masked number of year] that it had established on a tentative basis
at its meeting on [masked date] . The tentative ranges included
expansion of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for M3,
measured from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of
[masked number of year] . The monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial
debt had been set provisionally at 4 to 8 percent for [masked number of year] . All of
these ranges were unchanged from those that the Committee had set for
[masked number of year] : the latter had been adjusted down to take account of ongoing
increases in velocity.
In the Committee's discussion of the ranges for [masked number of year] which
tended to focus on M2, all the members expressed a preference for
affirming the M2 and M3 ranges that had been established on a provisional basis in July and all but one favored adopting the provisional
monitoring range for nonfinancial debt, that member preferred a lower
range. Many of the members commented on the uncertainties that
surrounded the establishment of ranges that were consistent with the
Committee's goals for the economy. They noted that a variety of
developments had altered the historical relationships between the
monetary aggregates and broad measures of economic performance over
the past several years. The resulting uncertainty implied that the
Committee needed to retain a flexible approach to the behavior of the
monetary aggregates in relation to their ranges, including the need to
assess a broad array of other indicators to gauge the implications of
monetary growth developments. Nonetheless, the members concluded that
as best they could evaluate evolving financial conditions at this
point, monetary growth within the tentative ranges would be likely to
promote the Committee's objectives of sustained economic expansion and
subdued inflation.
In [masked number of year] both M2 and M3 had grown at rates about 1/2 percentage point above the lower bounds of the ranges that the Committee now
contemplated retaining for [masked number of year] . According to a staff analysis
prepared for this meeting, somewhat faster growth in both of these
aggregates could be expected in [masked number of year] . But with nominal GDP also
expected to be stronger, as indicated by the central tendency of the
members' forecasts, the velocity of M2 would continue to rise at an
appreciably faster rate than historical relationships would have
suggested. This assessment assumed that households would continue to
redirect savings from M2-type accounts to higher-yielding investments,
especially bond and stock mutual funds. However, such redeployments
of funds should moderate this year to the extent that some investors
already had accomplished a considerable portion of their desired
portfolio reallocations and in light of the possibility that changes
in the prices of stocks and bonds, including the drop in bond prices
in recent months, would underline the risks of holding such
instruments. Moreover, depository institutions had strengthened their
capital positions markedly and were likely to compete more aggressively
for M2 and especially for M3-type deposits in an effort to maintain or
increase their role in the financing of expanding economic activity.
While these developments and their implications for monetary growth
could not be forecast with confidence, the members believed that the
ranges under consideration would probably be sufficiently wide to
accommodate M2 and M3 growth rates under a variety of likely velocity
scenarios. For example, if the factors that had tended to depress the
growth of the broad aggregates in relation to income did not abate as
expected this year, M2 and M3 growth would again be near the lower
bounds of the Committee's ranges. Alternatively, if the behavior of
these aggregates were to move closer to earlier patterns, growth in
the upper portions of the ranges would foster an economic performance
in line with the members' forecasts.
From the perspective of a longer time horizon, many of the
members noted that the provisional range for M2 was essentially at a
level that could well prove to be consistent with sustained and
noninflationary economic expansion. This conclusion assumed that
historical relationships between money growth and the expansion of
broad measures of economic performance would be restored at some
point. In the absence of such a development or the emergence of new,
reasonably stable relationships, the Committee would have to continue
to place diminished reliance on the monetary aggregates in the
formulation of monetary policy.
With regard to the range for nonfinancial debt, the members
anticipated that its growth this year would remain within the contemplated range. A staff analysis suggested that its federal borrowing
component would decrease as a result of the ongoing effects of deficit
reduction measures that had been enacted and the rise in tax receipts
stemming from economic growth. At the same time, borrowing by the
nonfederal sectors should strengthen further against the backdrop of
more comfortable financial positions and the expected pickup in GDP
expansion. In one view, however, a somewhat lower range was desirable
for nonfinancial debt. In light of the shift in business preferences
away from debt and toward equity, debt velocity could increase and
slower growth in debt would be consistent with the Committee's
objectives. However, this member could accept the higher range
favored by the other members for [masked number of year] .
At the conclusion of the Committee's discussion, all the
members indicated that they favored or could accept the ranges for
[masked number of year] that the Committee had established on a tentative basis at its
meeting in July [masked number of year] . In keeping with the Committee's usual
procedures under the Humphrey-Hawkins Act, the ranges would be
reviewed at midyear, or sooner if deemed necessary, in light of the
behavior of the aggregates and interim economic and financial
developments. The Committee approved the following paragraph for
inclusion in the domestic policy directive:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this
meeting established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of
1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively,
measured from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth
quarter of [masked number of year] . The Committee anticipated that
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases
could persist during the year and that money growth
within these ranges would be consistent with its broad
policy objectives. The monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt was set at 4 to 8
percent for the year. The behavior of the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light
of progress toward price level stability, movements in
their velocities, and developments in the economy and
financial markets.