The information reviewed at this meeting suggests
that economic activity is continuing to expand at a
moderate pace. Total nonfarm payroll employment edged
down in August after a sizable gain in July, but the
average workweek rose to a relatively high level and
the civilian unemployment rate declined to 6.7 percent.
Industrial production has advanced moderately over
recent months. Retail sales changed little in real
terms in July and August after increasing appreciably
in the second quarter. Housing starts were down
slightly in July but rose substantially in August.
Available indicators suggest a slowing in the expansion
of business capital spending from a robust pace earlier
in the year. The nominal U.S. merchandise trade
deficit was about unchanged in July from its average
rate in the second quarter. After rising at an
accelerated rate in the early part of the year,
consumer prices have increased more slowly and producer
prices have fallen in recent months.
Short-term interest rates have changed little
since the Committee meeting on [masked date] while yields
on intermediate and long-term debt obligations have
declined somewhat. In foreign exchange markets, the
trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the
other G-10 currencies depreciated substantially over
the intermeeting period.
M2 continued to expand at a slow rate in August,
while M3 turned up after declining in June and July.
For the year through August, M2 and M3 are estimated
to have grown at rates close to the lower end of the
Committee's ranges for the year. Total domestic
nonfinancial debt has expanded at a moderate rate in
recent months, and for the year through July it is
estimated to have increased at a rate in the lower half
of the Committee's monitoring range.
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at its
meeting in July lowered the ranges it had established
in February for growth of M2 and M3 to ranges of 1 to 5
percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from
the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of
[masked number of year] . The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases would
persist over the balance of the year and that money
growth within these lower ranges would be consistent
with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt also was
lowered to 4 to 8 percent for the year. For [masked number of year] the
Committee agreed on tentative ranges for monetary
growth, measured from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the
fourth quarter of [masked number of year] of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and
0 to 4 percent for M3. The Committee provisionally set
the monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt at 4 to 8 percent for [masked number of year] . The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be
evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and
developments in the economy and financial markets.
In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the
context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial,
and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent
with modest growth in M2 and M3 over the balance of the
year.