The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that
economic activity recorded another substantial gain in the second
quarter. Although consumer spending and homebuying apparently had
increased at a slower pace, business spending on durable equipment
remained quite strong and investment in nonresidential structures
rebounded from a weather-depressed level in the first quarter. In
addition, the rate of nonfarm inventory investment evidently had
picked up in the second quarter. Levels of resource utilization had
risen further: factory operating rates were at relatively high levels,
and the slack in labor markets had narrowed considerably over the
first half of the year to what appeared to be very low levels.
Increases in consumer and producer prices had remained moderate in
recent months, but prices of many basic industrial materials had
risen.
Nonfarm payroll employment advanced somewhat less rapidly in
May after the brisk increases of recent months; however, the average
workweek of production and nonsupervisory workers reached its highest
level since [masked number of year] . The reduction in job gains was widespread by
sector--including business services; finance, insurance, and real
estate; manufacturing; and construction. Employment in transportation
rebounded, reflecting the end of a Teamsters strike. The civilian
unemployment rate, measured on the new basis introduced in January,
declined sharply in May, to 6.0 percent; the decline might have been
overstated as a result of seasonal adjustment problems, but even after
correcting for these factors, the unemployment rate had fallen sharply
since late [masked number of year] .
The rise in industrial production slackened in April and May
after strong first-quarter gains. Much of the slowing was the result
of capacity constraints that prevented normal seasonal increases in
the production of motor vehicles. Growth of output of manufactured
goods other than motor vehicles and parts was at a slightly less
robust pace than in the first quarter but close to the rapid rate seen
in [masked number of year] ; business equipment and construction supplies continued to be
areas of strength. The overall rate of utilization in manufacturing
stayed at a high level in May, with most major industry groups
operating at or near capacity. In addition to motor vehicles,
capacity constraints were evident in the petroleum products and
nonelectrical machinery industry groups and in some individual product
lines in other industries.
Real personal consumption expenditures fell on balance in
April and May after a strong advance earlier in the year, but the
level of expenditures for the two months combined was a little above
the first-quarter average. The recent slowdown in consumer spending
in large part reflected reduced outlays for motor vehicles. Spending
for durable goods other than motor vehicles increased over April and
May at about the first-quarter pace. Outlays for nondurable goods
were down on balance in April and May, while spending for services in
May more than reversed a small April decline. Housing activity had
rebounded from weather disruptions early in the year to a pace close
to the elevated fourth-quarter rate. Single-family starts edged down
in May after declining substantially in April but were still at a
relatively high level. While the cash-flow affordability of home
ownership had fallen since late last year, it remained at favorable
levels in comparison with recent years. Multifamily starts in May
were at their highest level in more than three years; most of the
pickup occurred in the South, where vacancy rates had declined
recently.
Shipments of nondefense capital goods other than aircraft and
parts posted a further solid gain in May, although the upward trend
appeared to have moderated in recent months. Sales of heavy trucks
also were strong in April and May. Shipments of aircraft declined
sharply in April (latest available data), retracing much of a March
surge. Available data on orders for nondefense capital goods pointed
to a continued strong uptrend in business spending on durable
equipment. Nonresidential construction picked up in April and May
from a weather-depressed slump in the first quarter.
Business inventories increased in April, more than reversing
a March runoff; the overall pace of accumulation remained moderate,
and buildups were largely concentrated in segments of the economy
where market demand was robust. In manufacturing, inventories
increased in April and May after a small drawdown in March. The rise
in stocks was in line with shipments, and the ratio of stocks to
shipments stayed at a very low level. In April (latest available
data), wholesale inventories retraced most of the sizable March
drawdown. The ratio of inventories to sales in this sector remained
below the range that has prevailed in recent years. At the retail
level, inventory stocks again edged higher; the inventory-to-sales
ratio for this sector was well within the range observed over the past
year.
The nominal deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services
widened in April but was little changed from the average for the first
quarter; over the first four months of [masked number of year] the deficit was
significantly larger than that recorded in the fourth quarter of last
year. The value of exports of goods and services was down somewhat in
April, retracing part of a sharp runup in March. The uptrend in
exports since last fall has been led by shipments of machinery,
especially to expanding markets in Asia. The value of imports of
goods and services was about the same in April as in March; increases
in consumer goods, machinery, and oil were offset by declines in other
categories. The economies of all the major foreign industrial
countries expanded in the first quarter of [masked number of year] . Growth resumed in
Japan, western Germany, and France, while economic expansion continued
at a healthy pace in the United Kingdom and Canada.
Broad indexes of consumer and producer prices had risen
moderately through the first five months of the year. In May, the
rise in the overall index of consumer prices continued to be held down
by declines in energy prices. Excluding the food and energy
components, the increase in consumer prices in the twelve months
ending in May was smaller than that for the previous twelve months.
Producer prices of finished goods continued to edge lower in May,
reflecting further declines in prices of finished foods and energy
goods. Producer prices for items other than food and energy increased
at a faster rate in May, but the change over the twelve-month period
ending in May was very small. At an earlier stage of processing,
producer prices of crude materials other than food and energy
registered another small decline in May, although the index was
substantially higher in May than a year ago. Furthermore, prices of
many basic industrial materials had remained under upward pressure.
Average hourly earnings of production or nonsupervisory workers
increased by a larger amount in May than in April, but the rise over
the twelve months ended in May was about the same as in the previous
twelve months.
At its meeting on [masked date] the Committee adopted a
directive that called for increasing somewhat the degree of pressure
on reserve positions, taking account of a possible increase in the
discount rate. The directive did not include a presumption about the
likely direction of any further adjustment to policy during the
intermeeting period. The directive stated that in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable
economic growth, and giving careful consideration to economic,
financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater or slightly
lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable during the intermeeting
period. The reserve conditions associated with this directive were
expected to be consistent with modest growth of M2 and M3 over coming
months.
Immediately after the conclusion of the May meeting, the
Board of Governors approved a 1/2 percentage point increase in the
discount rate, to 3-1/2 percent, and the Committee permitted the full
amount of the increase to pass through to interest rates in reserve
markets. Thereafter, open market operations were conducted with a
view to maintaining the less accommodative degree of reserve pressure
sought by the Committee. After the policy change, the federal funds
rate rose 1/2 percentage point, to 4-1/4 percent, and remained at
about that level over the intermeeting period. Adjustment plus
seasonal borrowing trended higher over the intermeeting period,
reflecting the usual seasonal pickup in lending activity, and averaged
close to anticipated levels.
Market interest rates on instruments with more than three-month maturities moved lower immediately following the announcement of
the Committee's action, although some very short-term interest rates
moved up. The commercial bank prime rate also was raised by 1/2
percentage point, to 7-1/4 percent. Market participants apparently
interpreted the policy actions and the accompanying announcement as
signaling that the System would not take further tightening actions as
soon as they had anticipated earlier. Incoming data suggesting
sluggish spending and subdued inflation tended to confirm these market
assessments. Late in the intermeeting period, however, bond yields
retraced these declines, partly in association with a weakening dollar
in foreign exchange markets and rising commodity prices. Most major
indexes of equity prices rose early in the intermeeting period, but
they then moved lower in sympathy with the declines in bond prices and
the dollar and ended the period with small losses.
The trade-weighted value of the dollar in terms of the other
G-10 currencies fell significantly further on balance over the
intermeeting period. The renewed decline, which began toward the
middle of June, occurred in response to indications of an improved
economic outlook abroad, associated increases in foreign bond yields,
and heightened concerns about possible increases in U.S. inflation.
Developments suggesting less favorable prospects for progress in U.S.
Japanese trade negotiations also tended to strengthen the yen against
the dollar.
The broad monetary aggregates were weaker than the Committee
anticipated at the time of its previous meeting, with both M2 and M3
declining on average over May and June. The declines appeared to be
related in part to the continuing appeal of capital market
instruments. More generally, however, the rise in short-and long-term interest rates since the beginning of [masked number of year] coupled with the
reluctance of banks and other depository institutions to adjust their
offering rates promptly, had produced a widening of the opportunity
costs of holding deposits and had led households to move deposit
monies into direct and indirect holdings of market instruments. For
the year through June, both M2 and M3 were at the bottom of the
Committee's ranges for [masked number of year] and total domestic nonfinancial debt had
expanded at a moderate rate in the lower half of its monitoring range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting suggested that
the economy was operating at a level close to capacity and that the
expansion would slow over the next several quarters to a rate
generally in line with the growth of the economy's potential. To the
extent that aggregate demand tended to expand at a pace that could
foster higher inflation, it would not be accommodated by monetary
policy, and pressures would be generated in financial markets that
would restrain domestic spending. Consumer spending, which had been
increasing faster than household income for some time, was expected to
moderate as smaller gains in employment and income, coupled with
higher interest rates and reductions in the value of household
financial assets, exerted a restraining influence on consumption
patterns. Business fixed investment was projected to continue at a
brisk pace, although growth would be damped somewhat by the expected
deceleration in economic activity, a growing shortfall of corporate
cash flow relative to capital outlays, and higher financing costs.
The effects of higher mortgage interest rates were expected to cause
some slowing in the relatively robust pace of single-family
homebuilding. The restraint on output growth exerted by weak export
demand was expected to diminish because of the lower value of the
dollar and the somewhat faster recovery now projected in economic
activity abroad. The staff analysis suggested that, with the economy
already operating close to its long-run potential, no further
reduction in the core rate of inflation was likely over the forecast
horizon.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective
economic developments, members commented that the expansion continued
to display considerable momentum, with business activity apparently
still increasing at a pace above the economy's long-run growth
potential. At the same time, indications of some slowing in aggregate
demand had tended to increase over the last few months. The extent of
that slowing remained subject to considerable uncertainty, especially
in light of somewhat disparate data on employment and spending.
Nonetheless, it was generally agreed that, in the context of
appropriate fiscal and monetary policies, some moderation in economic
growth to a pace closer to that of the economy's long-run potential
was a reasonable expectation. Such a slowing seemed necessary to
forestall a buildup of inflation pressures in the view of many
members. A number of members emphasized that remaining margins of
unemployed labor and other production resources, while difficult to
assess, now appeared to be quite limited. Although views differed to
some degree, the members generally concluded that the various factors
affecting the course of inflation were likely to result, on balance,
in little change, or perhaps a small rise, in inflation over the [masked number of year] forecast horizon. Some members regarded the risks of a
significant divergence from their forecasts of economic growth and
inflation as fairly evenly balanced in either direction, but most
believed that those risks were tilted to the upside.
In keeping with the usual practice at meetings when the
Committee considers its long-run objectives for growth of the money
and debt aggregates, the members of the Committee and the Federal
Reserve Bank presidents not currently serving as members provided
specific individual projections of growth in real and nominal GDP, the
rate of unemployment, and the rate of inflation for the years [masked number of year] and
[masked number of year] . The central tendency of the forecasts of the rate of expansion
in real GDP for [masked number of year] as a whole was 3 to 3-1/4 percent, a little below
the rate of growth estimated for the first half of the year; for [masked number of year] the projections had a central tendency of 2-1/2 to 2-3/4 percent.
With regard to the expansion of nominal GDP, the forecasts centered on
growth rates of 5-1/2 to 6 percent for [masked number of year] and 5 to 5-1/2 percent for
[masked number of year] . The projections of more moderate growth in economic activity
were associated with rates of unemployment in a range of 6 to 6-1/4
percent in the fourth quarters of both [masked number of year] and [masked number of year] about the same
as the average unemployment rate in recent months. For the rate of
inflation, as measured by the CPI, the projections had a central
tendency of 2-3/4 to 3 percent for [masked number of year] and 2-3/4 to 3-1/2 percent for
[masked number of year] ; both ranges represented a slight increase from the average rate
over the past year. Favorable developments in the food and energy
sectors, which had held down overall inflation measures over the past
several quarters, were not expected to continue and the drop in the
dollar would be exerting upward pressures on prices in coming
quarters.
Pursuant to a request from the Chairman of the Senate Banking
Committee, the members considered extending their specific forecasts
by an additional year. Many expressed reservations about the
reliability and thus the usefulness of numerical forecasts extending
relatively far into the future. Moreover, they were concerned about
misunderstandings of specific long-range forecasts in relation to the
Committee's goals and the ongoing formulation of monetary policy. The
members concluded that, on balance, the Committee's policy intentions
and expectations would be conveyed more effectively by the Chairman in
his upcoming Congressional testimony through a discussion of the
important factors bearing on trends in economic growth, prices, and
unemployment; the uncertainties involved in projecting such variables;
and the role of monetary policy in achieving desired economic goals.
In the course of their discussion, Committee members noted that the
Administration's medium-term outlook contained reasonable estimates of
the trend growth in output.
In their review of developments in different parts of the
country and sectors of the economy, members referred to indications of
continuing growth in regional business activity ranging from
relatively modest to quite robust across much of the nation; at the
same time, some areas such as California continued to experience
generally stagnant economic conditions. While solid growth seemed to
characterize the overall economy, the members saw increasing signs of
some slowing in many areas. Business and consumer sentiment generally
remained quite positive, although a number of members commented on a
new note of caution among some of their business contacts and some
shaving of industry forecasts for the balance of the year.
Turning to the key consumer sector, members commented on
various indications of some moderation in the growth of expenditures.
Higher interest costs were cited by some business contacts as
constraining purchases of consumer durables, but members also referred
to the negative impact of persisting, highly visible cutbacks in
workforces by some major business firms and of growing consumer debt.
Some members also noted that supply constraints, such as limitations
on the availability of some popular automobile models, had tended to
curb the expansion in sales. Looking ahead, more moderate growth in
consumer spending seemed likely; apart from the direct effects of
higher interest rates on such spending, the prospectively less
ebullient housing sector was likely to retard demands for household
furnishings.
Business fixed investment was thought likely to continue to
provide appreciable stimulus to the expansion, though to a diminishing
extent in the context of slower overall growth in economic activity
and higher financing costs. While spending for equipment was likely
to moderate considerably from the extraordinarily rapid increases
recorded over an extended period, ongoing business efforts to improve
operating efficiencies would probably sustain substantial further
growth in equipment outlays. Nonresidential construction expenditures
were expected to post moderate increases after stagnating earlier; in
this connection, a number of members observed that commercial vacancy
rates were declining in various metropolitan areas and improved demand
for space was likely to generate increased construction activity.
Although higher interest costs could have some restraining effect,
financing for such projects was more readily available than earlier.
The outlook for inventory investment remained uncertain. Some buildup
in inventories was occurring, but business firms were continuing to
resist sizable increases and inventory-to-sales ratios remained at
unusually low levels. Developments that might be expected to foster a
faster buildup, such as some lengthening of order lead times and
rising pressures on capacity in some industries, had not led to the
strengthening in inventory investment that had characterized
comparable stages of previous business cycle expansions.
Members observed that the outlook for exports appeared to
have improved and that foreign trade, on net, probably would make a
small contribution to economic growth over the next several quarters.
Some noted that business contacts were reporting strong foreign demand
for various U.S. products. As members had noted at previous meetings,
the North American Free Trade Agreement appeared to have stimulated
increased trade between Mexico and the United States, although it was
still too early to gauge the extent of this development. More
generally, the decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and
a somewhat greater strengthening in the economies of major trading
partners than was expected earlier had enhanced the prospects for
appreciable growth in U.S. exports, and in the view of at least some
members that growth might prove to be considerably greater than was
currently projected.
Members remarked that uncertainties about remaining margins
of slack in the economy, accentuated by the change in the household
employment survey, and about potential levels of economic activity
over the quarters ahead made it particularly difficult to assess the
outlook for inflation. However, based on what seemed to be reasonable
estimates of resource utilization levels and their own projections
that the rate of economic growth would slow to a pace nearer the
economy's growth potential, the members generally concluded that the
rate of inflation, as measured by the CPI, might remain about
unchanged or tilt slightly higher over the forecast horizon. This
conclusion took into account the effects of the decline in the foreign
exchange value of the dollar, the increase in oil prices on world
markets, and the at-least-temporary rise in food prices. Some members
observed that the overall behavior of prices had been somewhat more
favorable than they would have predicted, given the strength of the
expansion and the level of resource utilization. One explanation
could be that increases in overall capacity and productivity stemming
from business restructuring activities and investments in new
equipment and facilities had been greater than expected. Comments
from numerous business contacts around the country continued to
indicate that despite the rising costs of many materials used in the
production process, highly competitive markets rendered it very
difficult or impossible to pass these higher costs through to prices
of finished goods. At the same time, labor compensation increases had
remained subdued despite indications of shortages of some types of
labor in many parts of the country. Exceptions involving sizable wage
increases continued to be cited for some industries, such as
construction and trucking, that were operating at full capacity.
Nonetheless, in the absence of an uptrend thus far in consumer price
inflation and given continuing uncertainties about job prospects
despite large job gains, wage pressures had remained restrained.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and
Balanced Growth Act of [masked number of year] (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee
at this meeting reviewed the ranges for growth in the monetary and
debt aggregates that it had established in February for [masked number of year] and it
decided on tentative ranges for growth in those aggregates in [masked number of year] .
The current ranges set in February for the period from the fourth
quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] included expansion of
1 to 5 percent for M2 and 0 to 4 percent for M3. A monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt had been set at 4 to 8
percent for [masked number of year] .
In the Committee's discussion, which as in the past tended to
focus on M2, all the members indicated that they were in favor of
retaining the current ranges for M2 and M3 for [masked number of year] and extending
those ranges on a provisional basis to [masked number of year] . In their evaluation of
appropriate growth ranges for [masked number of year] the members anticipated that the
projected moderation in the expansion of nominal GDP and the
likelihood that funds would continue to be diverted from deposits to
higher yielding market instruments would be reflected in relatively
sluggish growth in M2 and M3 and further increases in their velocity--the ratio of nominal GDP to these monetary measures. In the
circumstances, expected growth in M2 and M3 at rates around the lower
end of their ranges would be consistent with the Committee's overall
objective of fostering financial conditions that would promote
sustainable economic growth and contain pressures on prices. Indeed,
that objective might even imply a shortfall from one or both of the
current ranges, but shortfalls could be tolerated and explained if
they reflected greater-than-expected increases in velocity associated
with an acceptable economic performance. While growth of the broad
monetary aggregates might pick up somewhat next year, it probably
would remain damped relative to income. In light of this prospect,
and of the uncertainties about appropriate monetary growth in [masked number of year] the Committee decided to carry forward the [masked number of year] ranges, subject to a
review early next year. The Committee noted that the current ranges,
which had been reduced greatly over the years, could be viewed as
long-run benchmarks for monetary growth consistent with maximum
sustainable economic expansion in a noninflationary environment, if
there were a return to more normal velocity behavior. The Committee
recognized that considerable uncertainty about the behavior of
velocity was likely to persist and that a broad range of financial and
economic indicators, in addition to the monetary aggregates, would
need to be monitored in determining the appropriate course for
monetary policy.
In their review of the Committee's monitoring range for the
growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt, the members agreed that
the current range for [masked number of year] should be retained. This view took into
account staff projections indicating that the debt aggregate was
likely to grow within its present range this year, albeit the lower
half of that range. Considerable sentiment was expressed, however,
for reducing the debt monitoring range for [masked number of year] . Debt growth was
expected to remain relatively subdued in association with projections
of a slower rate of expansion in nominal GDP. Lowering the range
would underscore the Committee's view that rapid debt growth, should
it materialize and be sustained, could have adverse implications for
inflation and financial stability. Members emphasized, however, that
action to adjust the debt range did not imply increased Committee
emphasis on the debt aggregate, and most believed that the risks of
any misinterpretation could be minimized by including an appropriate
explanation in the report to Congress.
At the conclusion of this discussion, the Committee voted to
reaffirm the ranges for growth of M2 and M3 and the monitoring range
for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt that it had established
in February for [masked number of year] . The following statement was approved for
inclusion in the Committee's domestic policy directive:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee reaffirmed at this meeting the ranges it had established
in February for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent
and 0 to 4 percent respectively, measured from the
fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] .
The Committee anticipated that developments contributing to unusual velocity increases could persist
during the year and that money growth within these
ranges would be consistent with its broad policy
objectives. The monitoring range for growth of total
domestic nonfinancial debt was maintained at 4 to 8
percent for the year.