The Manager of the System Open Market Account reported on recent developments in foreign exchange markets.  There were no open market operations in foreign currencies for the System's account in the period since the previous meeting, and thus no vote was required of the Committee.
The Manager also reported on developments in domestic financial markets and on System open market transactions in government securities and federal agency obligations during the period [masked date] through [masked date] .  By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
The Committee then turned to a discussion of the economic and financial outlook and the implementation of monetary policy over the intermeeting period ahead.  A summary of the economic and financial information available at the time of the meeting and of the Committee's discussion is provided below, followed by the domestic policy directive that was approved by the Committee and issued to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The information reviewed at this meeting suggested that the economy expanded rapidly in the closing months of [masked number of year] . Widespread strength in domestic final demand and a diminished drag from net exports underpinned further solid gains in production, employment, and income. Inflation remained subdued despite very tight labor markets.
Nonfarm payroll employment recorded robust increases in November and December. Although manufacturing experienced further sizable job losses over the two months, strong employment gains were achieved in construction, retail trade, and the services industries. The civilian unemployment rate fell to 4.3 percent in December, and other measures of labor conditions also indicated that labor markets remained quite tight through year-end.
Industrial production rebounded in December from a small November decline. Industrial output strengthened for the fourth quarter as a whole, largely reflecting a surge in the production of motor vehicles and parts that more than offset sizable reductions in mining and utility output. The manufacture of high-tech equipment surged further and the production of construction supplies stayed on a brisk upward trend while activity in other manufacturing categories remained weak. On balance, output in manufacturing expanded at about the same pace as capacity, leaving the factory operating rate unchanged at a relatively low level.
Consumer spending, supported by further sizable gains in income and net worth, remained robust through year-end. Retail sales rose sharply in the fourth quarter. Expenditures for durable goods, particularly motor vehicles, were very strong. Outlays for nondurable goods were brisk despite sluggish growth in spending for apparel. Unseasonably mild weather held down spending for energy services in November and December, but purchases of other types of services recorded moderate increases. Surveys in early [masked number of year] indicated buoyant consumer sentiment, reflecting optimism about personal finances and the employment outlook.
Residential housing activity continued to display substantial strength in the fourth quarter. Single-family housing starts remained at a very high level in December, and sales of new homes in that month were only slightly below the record established in November. Sales of existing homes hit a record high in December. Unseasonably favorable weather extended the construction season in some areas of the country, but low mortgage rates, rapid employment growth, rising net worth, and special financing programs designed to broaden opportunities for homeownership were important factors in the strength of home sales. Multifamily housing starts edged lower in the fourth quarter as a December increase partially reversed a November decline; rents have continued to rise in real terms over the last several years, but vacancy rates have changed little.
Business fixed investment picked up markedly in the fourth quarter after the small decline of the previous quarter. Much of the surge in spending on producers' durable equipment was attributable to a pickup in purchases of motor vehicles and aircraft. Elsewhere, investment in high-tech equipment expanded rapidly further, while spending for other types of durable equipment decelerated somewhat.  Nonresidential construction activity apparently rose moderately in the fourth quarter. Office construction picked up further in an environment of falling vacancy rates and rising rental costs, but other building activity remained sluggish.
The pace of business inventory investment in October and November was slightly above that of the third quarter, but in comparison with strong sales inventory positions were relatively lean in most industries. In manufacturing, stocks increased moderately in the October-November period, and the aggregate stock-shipments ratio was in the middle of its narrow range for the past year. Inventory investment in the wholesale sector slowed considerably, but much of the swing reflected the unusually early harvest of farm products. The inventory-sales ratio for this sector was still at the top of its range for the last year, and inventory overhangs persisted in metals and minerals, machinery, and chemicals. Retailers stepped up their inventory accumulation in the October-November period. However, sales were robust and the inventory-sales ratio for this sector continued to trend downward.
The average deficit on U.S. trade in goods and services for October and November was a little smaller than the rate for the third quarter. The value of exports for the two-month period rose considerably, with the largest gains occurring in automotive products shipped to Canada, aircraft, machinery, agricultural products, and services. The value of imports also moved up, but by less than the value of exports. While the increases in imports were widespread across trade categories, particularly large advances were recorded for automotive products from Canada and Mexico and for computers. The available data suggested a weaker economic performance in most of the major foreign industrial countries in the fourth quarter; economic activity likely fell further in Japan, and economic growth apparently slowed in most countries of the euro bloc. Activity in most Asian developing countries remained depressed, though some seemed to be approaching a trough and Korea appeared to be in the early stages of a recovery. Moreover, economic conditions worsened in most Latin American economies.
Inflation remained low in [masked number of year] . Consumer prices changed little in December, reflecting a sizable drop in energy prices that offset the large increase in tobacco prices put in place after a settlement was reached between states and the tobacco makers. For [masked number of year] as a whole, CPI inflation was slightly lower than in [masked number of year] ; a substantial decline in energy prices more than offset a sizable pickup in food inflation and a small increase in core inflation. At the producer level, prices of finished goods edged down in [masked number of year] following an appreciable decline in [masked number of year] . While finished energy prices fell by more in [masked number of year] finished food prices were down only slightly and prices of core finished goods turned up  after having been unchanged in [masked number of year] . Growth of hourly compensation of private industry workers slowed considerably in the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] and the increase in hourly compensation for the year was little changed from that of [masked number of year] .
At its meeting on [masked date] the Committee adopted a directive that called for maintaining conditions in reserve markets that were consistent with an unchanged federal funds rate of about 4-3/4 percent and that did not contain any bias with regard to the direction of possible adjustments to policy during the intermeeting period. In the Committee's view, the stance of policy appeared to be consistent with its objectives of fostering sustained low inflation and high employment, and the risks to this outlook were reasonably well balanced over the near term.
Open market operations during the intermeeting period were directed toward maintaining the federal funds rate at the Committee's desired level. In the event, however, the rate averaged a little below its intended level, largely reflecting the efforts of the Trading Desk to keep reserve pressures around year-end to a minimum. Other short-term market rates declined somewhat on balance, partly owing to the disappearance of year-end pressures. Most long-term interest rates changed little over the intermeeting period, but Treasury bond yields moved up slightly on balance, apparently in response to incoming data suggesting stronger-than-expected economic growth.
In foreign exchange markets, the trade-weighted value of the dollar appreciated slightly on balance over the period. A small decline in the dollar relative to other major currencies was more than offset by the dollar's appreciation in terms of the currencies of a broader group of countries that also are important trading partners of the United States. The dollar appreciated against the euro following the release of data confirming a slowdown of economic growth in much of the euro area and the absence of inflationary pressures, and it  rose against the British pound after the Bank of England unexpectedly cut its repo rate. Moreover, the economic crisis in Brazil apparently contributed to an increase in the dollar relative to some emerging-market currencies. Against the yen, however, the dollar fell in early January to its lowest level in more than two years, evidently in response to sharp increases in yields on Japanese bonds, but the decline was partially reversed subsequently.
M2 and M3 continued to expand rapidly in December, with their liquid components, especially money market funds, registering particularly large increases. The effects of recent monetary policy easings in reducing the opportunity costs of these components, strong growth in GDP, and perhaps continued heightened demands for liquid and safe assets seemed to have contributed to this performance. Available data for January pointed to appreciable moderation in the growth of both aggregates. From the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] M2 and M3 rose at rates well above their annual ranges, while total domestic nonfinancial debt expanded at a pace somewhat above the middle of its range.
The staff forecast prepared for this meeting pointed to a substantial moderation in the expansion to a rate commensurate with the growth of the economy's potential. Growth of private final demand would be damped by the anticipated waning of positive wealth effects stemming from earlier large increases in equity prices and by slow growth of spending on consumer durables, housing units, and business capital goods after the earlier buildup in the stocks of these items. Subdued expansion of foreign economic activity and the lagged effects of the earlier rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar were expected to place continuing, though diminishing, restraint on the demand for U.S. exports for some period ahead and to lead to further substitution of imports for domestic products. Pressures on labor resources were likely to remain near current levels and inflation was projected to rise somewhat over the projection horizon, largely as a result of an expected upturn in energy prices.
In the Committee's discussion of current and prospective economic conditions, members referred to continuing indications of an exceptional economic performance that was characterized by the persistence of quite low inflation despite very high and rapidly rising levels of overall output and employment.  The members currently saw few signs that the economic expansion had moderated to a more sustainable rate, but most continued to anticipate substantial slowing over the year ahead to a pace close to or somewhat above that of the economy's long-run potential.  While many agreed that such an outlook was subject to greater upside risk than they had anticipated a few months   ago--given the abatement of market turmoil and positive business and consumer sentiment---such factors as the waning effects of the earlier increases in stock market wealth on consumer spending and some slowing in the extraordinary growth in business expenditures for equipment were likely to exert a moderating effect on the expansion. Moreover, potentially greater weakness in foreign economies and possible disruption to foreign financial markets remained a downside risk to the outlook. Against this background, the members generally anticipated some pickup in inflation, though to a still relatively low rate, primarily as last year's declines in oil and other import prices were not repeated.  A number referred, however, to the experience of recent years, which suggested that the inflation process was not well understood and that inflation forecasts were subject to a wide range of uncertainty.
In keeping with the practice at meetings just prior to the Federal Reserve's semi-annual monetary policy report to Congress and the Chairman's associated testimony, the members of the Committee and the Federal Reserve Bank presidents not currently serving as members had provided individual projections of the growth in real and nominal GDP, the rate of unemployment, and the rate of inflation for the year [masked number of year] .  Their forecasts of the rate of expansion in real GDP in [masked number of year] had a central tendency of    2-1/2 to 3 percent and a full range of 2 to 3-1/2 percent.  Such growth was expected to be associated with a civilian unemployment rate in a range centering on 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 percent in the fourth quarter of this year, implying little or no change from the current level.  With regard to nominal GDP growth in [masked number of year] the forecasts were mainly in a range of 4 to 4-1/2 percent, with an overall range of 3-3/4 to 5 percent.   Projections of the rate of inflation, as measured by the consumer price index, had a central tendency of 2 to      2-1/2 percent, somewhat above the outcome for [masked number of year] when the rise in the index was held down by a marked decline in energy prices and reduced prices of non-oil imports.
In their review of developments across the nation, members reported a mix of high overall levels of economic activity in every region but softness in a number of specific business activities, notably those affected by foreign competition.  In particular, many manufacturing firms along with businesses engaged in agriculture, mining, and energy were being adversely affected by weak demand in foreign markets, strong import competition, and depressed oil and other commodity prices in world markets. Foreign developments were seen as a continuing element of weakness for the U.S. economy and  also as a major source of uncertainty in the outlook for the year ahead.  In this regard many members referred in particular to the problems facing Brazil and the risk that further financial and economic instability in that nation would spread to other Latin American countries, with repercussions on the U.S. economy.   Markets in the major trading nations around the world were likely to remain on the soft side, with Japan struggling to recover from its ongoing recession and economic growth in Europe showing signs of becoming more sluggish.
Robust domestic demand clearly had offset weakness in net exports by a large margin in [masked number of year] and while the growth in such demand was projected to slow this year it was expected to remain sufficient to support appreciable further expansion in overall economic activity.  Consumer spending had exhibited considerable vigor during the recent holiday season and anecdotal reports from several regions suggested that the momentum in such spending had carried into the opening weeks of this year.  Further, though prospectively moderating, growth in jobs and incomes, supportive credit conditions, and upbeat consumer sentiment suggested that consumer expenditures were likely to be well maintained over coming quarters.  Even so, members anticipated at least some moderation in the growth of consumption after an extended period of sizable accumulation of consumer durable goods.  Among other factors, the positive effects on consumer spending of the large accumulation of stock market wealth in recent years were likely to abate over time in the absence of a further and unanticipated surge in stock market prices.
Growth in business capital spending also was expected to moderate as the year progressed to a pace well below that experienced in recent years.  Members commented in this regard that slowing growth in overall spending normally fostered reduced capital investment, and indeed developments in the second half of [masked number of year] suggested that such investment might already be on a less strong uptrend.  Moreover, the prospects of reduced growth in profits and a less ebullient stock market could also be expected to damp business fixed investment.  Nonetheless, growth in such investment likely would continue to exceed that of overall spending, reflecting ongoing efforts to improve efficiency and hold down labor costs in highly competitive markets and more generally to take advantage of the declining costs of business equipment and the rapid pace of technological innovation.   Members also cited reports from contacts in various sectors of the economy and areas of the country that business plans continued to call for substantial outlays for business equipment.  Nonresidential building activity remained robust in several regions, but given already ample capacity in many sectors, the prospects for such construction were relatively weak.
Housing activity had continued to display impressive strength in many parts of the country, evidently reflecting rapid growth in employment and incomes, rising household net worth, and low mortgage interest rates.  With the affordability of new homes expected to remain unusually attractive, the members anticipated that housing activity would be sustained at a high level.  Some moderation in housing starts from recent peak levels appeared likely, however, in the context of the slowing in job and income gains associated with the members' overall forecasts.
With regard to the outlook for inflation, the members saw no evidence of accelerating price inflation despite high levels of business activity and very tight labor markets across most of the nation.  Indeed, the conjuncture over an extended period of strong economic growth, very low rates of unemployment, and the absence of any buildup of inflation could not be explained in terms of normal historical relationships.  While temporary factors, such as declining oil prices, had played a role in depressing inflation, the persistence of very low inflation under these conditions most likely also resulted from more lasting changes in economic relationships.  These were perhaps best evidenced by the widespread inability of business firms to raise prices because of strong competitive pressures in domestic and global markets and the related efforts to hold down costs, including labor costs.  Contributing importantly to the success of those cost-saving efforts were the continued rapid growth of increasingly efficient business capital.  The accumulation of such capital evidently had greatly enhanced productivity in a broad range of economic activities.  In this regard, available indicators suggested that  productivity gains had essentially matched increases in labor costs for nonfinancial corporations over the past year.  Members also cited widespread expectations of low inflation as an important underlying factor in moderating wage and price increases.
Looking ahead, an abatement or reversal of some of the temporary factors reducing prices was likely to raise measured inflation.  The course of underlying inflation pressures was more difficult to gauge, however.  If growth slowed to trend, as many expected, uncertainty about evolving relationships among economic activity, productivity growth, and wages made it unclear whether the enhanced competitiveness in many markets and greater cost reducing efforts of businesses would be sufficient to continue to hold price increases in check at the current degree of tautness in labor markets.  Members generally agreed that if labor markets continued to tighten, cost and price pressures would begin to pick up.  Some members also expressed concern that rapid money growth, should it persist, would suggest that monetary policy was too accommodative to contain inflation pressures. On balance, while a somewhat less favorable inflation performance was viewed as likely over the year ahead, the members did not anticipate any substantial deterioration in the inflation climate if growth in economic activity approximated the central tendency of their forecasts.
In keeping with the requirements of the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of [masked number of year] (the Humphrey-Hawkins Act), the Committee reviewed the ranges for growth of the monetary and debt aggregates in [masked number of year] that it had established on a tentative basis in early July [masked number of year] .  Those ranges included expansion of 1 to 5 percent for M2 and 2 to 6 percent for M3, measured from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] .  The associated range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial sector debt was provisionally set at 3 to 7 percent for [masked number of year] .  The tentative ranges for [masked number of year] were unchanged from the ranges that had been adopted for the past several years.
All the members endorsed a proposal to adopt the growth ranges for M2 and M3 in [masked number of year] that had been established on a provisional basis in July of last year. According to a staff analysis, growth of these aggregates would moderate considerably this year but was likely to remain above the tentative ranges, especially in the case of M3.  The rapid growth of M2 and M3 in [masked number of year] was associated with outsized declines in their velocities that appeared to have resulted in part from the turbulent behavior of financial markets and related efforts by the public to move funds to relatively safe and liquid assets and to turn to banks for credit.  Other factors appear to have included some rechanneling of financial flows into money-type balances after an extended period of surging stock market prices and the drop in the opportunity cost of holding money as market interest rates fell over the latter part of the year. The expansion of M3 was further stimulated by the ongoing strength in institution-only money market funds whose popularity as a cash management tool continued to grow.
The calming of financial markets and forecasts of moderating nominal GDP  growth pointed to reduced growth in the broad monetary aggregates this year.  However, it was clear that substantial uncertainty still surrounded any projection of monetary expansion and the linkage between particular rates of money growth over a year and the basic objectives of monetary policy. In these circumstances, the members did not see any firm basis for deviating from the practice in recent years of setting ranges that, assuming  velocity behavior consistent with average  historical patterns, would serve as benchmarks for monetary expansion consistent with longer-run price stability and a sustainable rate of real economic growth.
Domestic nonfinancial debt, which had grown at a rate in the upper part of its 3 to 7 percent range in [masked number of year] was thought likely to remain within that range this year, indeed near the midpoint of the range according to a staff analysis.  Outstanding federal debt was expected to contract by a larger amount this year and, given current economic forecasts, the debt of the major nonfinancial sectors of the economy seemed likely to grow a bit more slowly. Thus, the members saw no reason to depart from the tentative range for nonfinancial debt, which was expected to readily encompass the likely rate of growth in this aggregate.
At the conclusion of this review, the Committee voted to approve without change the ranges for [masked number of year] that it had established on a tentative basis on [masked date] .  Accordingly, the following statement of longer-run policy and growth ranges for [masked number of year] was approved for inclusion in the domestic policy directive:
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial
conditions that  will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth
in output.  In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this meeting
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 1 to 5 percent and 2 to 6
percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of [masked number of year] to the fourth
quarter of [masked number of year] .  The range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt
was set at 3 to 7 percent for the year.  The behavior of  the monetary
aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward
price level stability, movements in their velocities, and developments
in the economy and financial markets.